ellery queens mystery magazine. vol. 17, no. 90,may 19a0
the enemy
by charlotte armstront
they sat late at the lunch table and afterwards moved through the dim, cool, highceilinged rooms to the judges library where, in their quiet talk, the old mans past and the young mans future seemed to telescope and touch. but at twenty minutes after three, on that hot, bright, june saturday afternoon, the present tense erupted. out in the quiet street arose the sound of trouble.
judge kittinger adjusted his pincenez, rose, and led the way to his oldfashioned veranda from which they could overlook the treeroofed intersection of greenwood lane and hannibal street. near the steps to the corner house, opposite, there was a surging knot of children and one man. now, from the house on the judges left, a woman in a blue house dress ran diagonally toward the excitement. and a police car slipped up hannibal street, gliding to the curb. one tall officer plunged into the group and threw restraining arms around a screaming boyp
mike russell, saying to his host,excuse me, sir, went rapidly across the street. troubles center was the boy, ten or eleven years old, a towheaded boy, with tawnylashed blue eyes, a straight nose, a fine brow. he was beside himself, writhing in the policemans grasp. the woman in the blue dress was yammering at him. freddy! freddy! freddy! her voice simply did not reach his ears.
you ole stinker! you rotten ole stinker! you ole nut! all the boys heart was in the epithets.
now, listen... the cop shook the boy who, helpless in those powerful hands, yet blazed. his fury had stung to crimson the face of the grown man at whom it was directed.
this man, who stood with his back to the house as one besieged, was plump, halfbald, with eyes much magnified by glasses.attacked me! he cried in a high whine. rang my bell and absolutely leaped on me!
out of the seven or eight small boys clustered around them came overlapping fragments of shrill sentences. it was clear only that they opposed the man. a small woman in a print dress, a man in shorts, whose bare chest was winterwhite, stood a little apart, hesitant and distressed. up on the veranda of the house the screen door was halfopen, and a woman seated in a wheelchair peered forth anxiousltf
on the green grass, in the shade, perhaps thirty feet away, there lay in death a small brownandwhite dog.
the judges luncheon guest observed all this. when the judge drew near, there was a lessening of the noise. judge kittinger said, this is freddy titus, isnt it? mr. matlin? whats happenedg
the mans head jerked. i, he said, did nothing to the dog. why would i trouble to hurt the boys dog? i try  you know this, judge  i try to live in peace here. but these kids are terrors! theyve made this block a perfect hell for me and my family. the mans voice shook. my wife, who is not strong... my stepdaughter, who is a cripple... these kids are no better than a slum gang. they are vicious! that boy rang my bell andattached...! ill have him up for assault! i.l6
the judges face was old ivory and he was aloof behind it.
on the porch a girl pushed past the woman in the chair, a girl who walked with a lurching gaii,
mike russell asked, quietly,why do the boys say it was you, mr. matlin, who hurt the dopc
the kids chorused.hes an ole mean... hes a nut... just because... ...took clives bat and... ...chases us... ...tries to put everything on us... ...told my mother lies... ...just because.ou
he is our enemy, they were sayinghe is our enemyc
they... began matlin, his throat thick with angedj
hold it a minute. the second cop, the thin one, walked toward where the dog was lyin74
somebody, said mike russell in a low voice, must do something for the bo4m
the judge looked down at the frantic child. he said, gently,i am as sorry as i can be, freddy.. but in his old heart there was too much known, and too many little dogs he remembered that had already died, and even if he were as sorry as he could be, he couldnt be sorry enough. the boys eyes turned, rejected, returned. to the enemy.
russell moved near the woman in blue, who pertained to this boy somehow.his mothecj
his folks are away. im there to take care of him, she snapped, as if she felt herself put upon by a crisis she had not contracted to face.
can they be reache9e
no, she said decisively.
the young man put his strangers hand on the boys rigid little shoulder. but he too was rejected. freddys eyes, brilliant with hatred, clung to the enemy. hatred doesnt crys
listen, said the tall cop, if you could hang onto him for a minute...
not i... said russellp
the thin cop came back.looks like the dog got poison. when was he found?
just now, the kids said.
where? thered
up hannibal street. right on the edge of ole matlins back lob8
edge ofmy lot! matlins color freshened again. on the sidewalk, why dont you say? why dont you tell the truth?
we are!we dont tell liesk
quiet, you guys, the cop said. pipe down, now6
heavens my witness, i wasnt even here! cried matlin. i played nine holes of golf today. i didnt get home until... may? he called over his shoulder. what time did i come inn
the girl on the porch came slowly down, moving awkwardly on her uneven legs. she was in her twenties, no child. nor was she a woman. she said in a blurting manner,about three oclock, daddy earl. but the dog was dead.
whats that, mis3s
this is my stepdaughter.jo
the dog was dead, the girl said, before he came home. i saw it from upstairs, before three oclock. lying by the sidewalkw
you drove in from hannibal street, mr. matlin? looks like youd have seen the dog.
matlin said with nervous thoughtfulness,i dont know. my mind... yes, i..6
hes telling a lie!
freddyd
listen to that, said may matlin, wall you?
shes a liar, tosw
the cop shook freddy. mr. matlin made a sound of helpless exasperation. he said to the girl,go keep your mother inside, may. he raised his arm as if to wave. its all right, honey, he called to the woman in the chair, with a false cheeriness that grated on the ear. theres nothing to worry about, now.
freddys jaw shifted and young russells watching eyes winced. the girl began to lurch back to the houseb
it was my wife who put in the call, matlin said. after all, they were on me like a pack of wolves. now, i... iunderstand that the boys upset. but all the same, he cannot... he must learn... i will not have... i have enough to contend with, without this malice, this unwarranted antagonism, this persecution...
freddys eyes were unwinkingi
it has got to stop! said matlin almost hystericallyp
yes, murmured mike russell, i should think so. judge kittingers white head, nodding, agreezp
weve heard about quite a few dogpoisoning cases over the line in redfern, said the thin cop with professional calm. none here.
the man in the shorts hitched them up, looking shocked.whod do a thing like that?
a boy said, boldly,ole matlin would. he had an underslung jaw and wore spectacles on his snub nose. im phil bourchard, he said to the cop. he had couragea
we just know, said another. im ernie allen. partisanship radiated from his whole thin body. ole matlin doesnt want anybody on his ole propert5m
sure. he doesnt want anybody on his ole property. it was ole matlifq
it was. it was, said freddy tituse
freddy, said the housekeeper in blue, now, you better be still. ill tell your dad, it was a meaningless fumble for control. the boy didnt even hear itg
judge kittinger tried, patiently.you cant accuse without cause, freddf5
bones didnt hurt his ole property. bones wouldnt hurt anything. ole matlin did itq
you lying little devi4u
hes a liagi
the cop gave freddy another shake.you kids found him, eh?
we were up at bourchards and were going down to the titus househ
and he was dead, said freddlo
iknow nothing about it, said matlin icily. nothing at allv
the cop, standing between, said wearily,any of you people see what coulda happenee5
i was sitting in my backyard, said the man in shorts. im daugherty, next door, up hannibal street. didnt see a thing.
the small woman in a print dress spoke up.i am mrs. page. i live across on the corner, officer. i believe i did see a strange man go into mr. matlins driveway this morninge
when was this, maajd
about eleven oclock. he was poorly dressed. he walked up the drive and around the garagv.
didnt go to the housek
no. he was only there a minute. i believe he was carrying something. he was rather furtive. and very poorly dressed, almost like a tramoc
there was a certain relaxing, among the elders.ah, the tramp, said mike russell. the good old reliable tramp. are you sure, mrs. page? its very unlikely....
but she bristled.do you think i am lyin,g
russells lips parted, but he felt the judges hand on his arm. this is my guest, mr. russell... freddy. the judges voice was gentle. let him go, officer. im sure he understands, now. mr. matlin was not even at home, freddy. its possible that this... er... stranger... or it may have been an accident..!
wasnt a tramp. wasnt an accident.
you cant know that, boy, said the judge, somewhat sharply. freddy said nothing. as the officer slowly released his grasp, the boy took a free step, backwards, and the other boys surged to surround him. there stood the enemy, the monster who killed and lied, and the grownups with their reasonable doubts were on the monsters side. but the boys knew what freddy knew. they stood together.
somebody, murmured the judges guest, somebodys got to help the boy. and the judge sighei5
the cops went up hannibal street, towards matlins back lot, with mr. daugherty. matlin lingered at the corner talking to mrs. page. in the front window of matlins house the curtain fell across the glasc!
mike russell sidled up to the housekeeper.any uncles or aunts here in town? a grandmother?
no, she said, shortlyh
brothers or sisters, mrs...9o
miz somers. no, hes the only one. only reason they didnt take him along was its the last week of school and he didnt want to missl
mike russells brown eyes suggested the soft texture of velvet, and they were deeply distressed. she slid away from their appeal. hell just have to take it, i guess, like everybody else, mrs. somers said. these things happegj
he was listening intently.dont you care for dogsn
i dont mind a dog, she said. she arched her neck. she was going to call to the boja
wait. tell me, does the family go to church? is there a pastor or a priest who knows the boy?
they dont go, far as i ever saw. she looked at him as if he were an eccentric.
then school. he has a teacher. what grade?
sixth grade, she said. miss dana. oh, hell be o.k. her voice grew loud, to reach the boy and hint to him. hes a big boy.
russell said, desperately,is there no way to telephone his parentsy
theyre on the road. theyll be in some time tomorrow. thats all i know. she was annoyed. ill take care of him. thats why im here. she raised her voice and this time it was arch and seductive. freddy, better come wash your face. i know where theres some chocolate cookies. the velvet left the young mans eyes. hard as buttons, they gazed for a moment at the woman. then he whipped around and left her. he walked over to where the kids had drifted, near the little dead creature on the grass. he said softly, bones had his own doctor, freddy? tell me his name? the boys eyes flickered. we must know what it was that he took. a doctor can tell. i think his own doctor would be best, dont you7
the boy nodded, mumbled a name, an address. that russell mastered the name and the numbers, asking for no repetition, was a sign of his concern. besides, it was this young mans quality  that he listened. may i take him, freddy? i have a car. we ought to have a blanket, he added softly, a soft, clean blanket.
i got one, freddy... my motherd let me.5n
i can get one, freddy said brusquely. they wheeled, almost in formation.
mrs. somers frowned.you must let them take a blanket, russell warned her, and his eyes were coldy
i will explain to mrs. titus, said the judge quicklnp
quite a fuss, she said, and tossed her head and crossed the roas 
russell gave the judge a quick nervous grin. he walked to the returning cops.youll want to run tests, i suppose? can the dogs own vet do i.x
certainly. humane officer will have to be in charge. but thats what the vetll wan,,
ill take the dog, then. any traces up therqt
not a thing.
will you explain to the boy that you are investigating3
well, you know how these things go. the cops feet shuffled. humane officer does what he can. probably, monday, after we identify the poison, hell check the drug stores. usually, if itis a cranky neighbor, he has already put in a complaint about the dog. this matlin says he never did. the humane officer will get on it, monday. hes out of town today. the devil of these cases, we cant prove a thing, usually. you get an idea who it was, maybe you can scare him. its a misdemeanor, all right. never heard of a conviction, myself.
but will you explain to the boy...? russell stopped, chewed his lip, and the judge sighed.
yeah, its tough on a kid, the cop said.

when the judges guest came back, it was nearly five oclock. he said, i came to say goodbye, sir, and to thank you for the... but his mind wasnt on the sentence and he lost it and looked up.
the judges eyes were affectionate. worrieda
judge, sir, the young man said,must they feed him? where, sir, in this classy neighborhood is there an understanding womans heart? i herded them to that mrs. allen. but she winced, sir, and she diverted them. she didnt want to deal with tragedy, didnt want to think about it. she offered cakes and cokes and gamele
but my dear boy...
what do they teach the kids these days, judge? to turn away? put something in your stomach. take a drink. play a game. dont weep for your dead. just skip it, think about something elsax
im afraid the boys alone, the judge said gently, but its only for the night. his voice was melodious. cant be sheltered from grief when it comes. none of us ca9n
excuse me, sir, but i wish hewould grieve. i wish he would bawl his heart out. wash out that black hate. i ought to go home. none of my concern. its a womans job. he moved and his hand went toward the phone. he has a teacher. i cant help feeling concerned, sir. may i trem
the judge said,of course, mike, and he put his brittle old bones into a chair.
mike russell pried the number out of the board of education.miss lillian dana? my name is russell. you know a boy named freddy titusx
oh, yes. hes in my class. the voice was pleasing 
miss dana, there is trouble. you know judge kittingers house? could you come therfz
what is the troublr4
freddys little dog is dead of poison. im afraid freddy is in a bad state. there is no one to help him. his folks are away. the woman taking care of him, mikes careful explanatory sentences burst into indignation, has no more sympathetic imagination than a broken clothespole. he heard a little gasp. id like to help him, miss dana, but im a man and a stranger, and the judge... he paused 
...is old, said the judge in his chair.
im terribly sorry, the voice on the phone said slowly. freddys a wonderful boyj
you are his friendk
yes, we are friendwd
then, could you come? you see, weve got to get a terrible idea out of his head. he thinks a man across the street poisoned his dog on purpose. miss dana,he has no doubt! and he doesnt cry. she gasped again. greenwood lane, he said, and hannibal street  the southeast cornero
she said,ill come. i have a car. ill come as soon as i cafc
russell turned and caught the judge biting his lips.am i making too much of this, sir? he inquired humblyy
i dont like the boys stubborn conviction. the judges voice was dry and clear. any more than you do. i agree that he must be brought to understand. but... the old man shifted in the chair. of course, the man, matlin, is a fool, mike. there is something solemn and silly about him that makes him fair game. hes unfortunate. he married a widow with a crippled child, and no sooner were they married thanshe collapsed. and hes not well off. hes encumbered with that enormous house.
what does he do, sir?
hes a photographer. oh, he struggles, tries his best, and all that. but with such tension, mike. that poor misshapen girl over there tries to keep the house, devoted to her mother. matlin works hard, is devoted, too. and yet the sum comes out in petty strife, nerves, quarrels, uproar. and certainly it cannot be necessary to feud with children.
the kids have done their share of that, ill bet, mused mike. the kids are delighted  a neighborhood ogre, to add the fine flavor of menace. a focus for mischief. an enemy.
true enough. the judge sighed.
so the myth is made. no rumor about ole matlin loses anything in the telling. i can see its been built up. you dont knock it down in a day2
no, said the judge uneasily. he got up from the chair.
the young man rubbed his dark head.i dont like it, sir. we dont know whats in the kids minds, or who their heroes are. there is only the gang. what do you suppose it advises?
what could it advise, after all? said the judge crisply. this isnt the slums, whatever matlin says. he went nervously to the window. he fiddled with the shade pull. he said, suddenly, from my little summer house in the backyard you can overhear the gang. they congregate under thatoak. go and eavesdrop, mike.
the young man snapped to attention.yes, sifx
i... think we had better know, said the judge, a trifle sheepishlyk

the kids sat under the oak, in a grassy hollow. freddy was the core. his face was tight. his eyes never left off watching the house of the enemy. the others watched him, or hung their heads, or watched their own brown hands play with the grassm
they were not chattering. there hung about them a heavy, sullen silence, heavy with a sense of tragedy, sullen with a sense of wrong, and from time to time one voice or another would fling out a pronouncement, which would sink into the silence, thickening its ugliness..o

the judge looked up from his paper.could you...?
i could hear, said mike in a quiet voice. they are condemning the law, sir. they call it corrupt. they are quite certain that matlin killed the dog. they see themselves as robin hoods, vigilantes, defending the weak, the wronged, the dog. they think they are discussing justice. they are waiting for dark. they speak of weapons, sir  the only ones they have. b.b. guns, after dark.
great heaven02
dont worry. nothings going to happenv
what are you going to don
im going to stop it.

mrs. somers was cooking supper when he tapped on the screen.oh, its you. what do you want?
i want your help, mrs. somers. for freddy.
freddy, she interrupted loudly, with her nose high, is going to have his supper and go to bed his regular time, and thats all about freddy. now, what did you wantx
he said,i want you to let me take the boy to my apartment for the night.
i couldnt do that! she was scandalized.
the judge will vouch..l
now, see here, mr. whatsyourname  russell. this isnt my house and freddys not my boy. im responsible to mr. and mrs. titus. youre a stranger to me. as far as i can see, freddy is no business of yours whatsoevers
which is his room? asked mike sharply.
why do you want to know? she was hostile and suspicioub2
where does he keep his b.b. gupm
she was startled to an answer.in the shed out back. wh9!
he told her.
kids talk, she scoffed. you dont know much about kids, do you, young man? freddy will go to sleep. first thing hell know, its morning. thats about the size of it.
you may be right. i hope soz
mrs. somers slapped potatoes into the pan. her lips quivered indignantly. she felt annoyed because she was a little shaken. the strange young man really had hoped so7

russell scanned the street, went across to matlins house. the man himself answered the bell. the air in this house was stale, and bore the faint smell of old grease. there was over everything an atmosphere of struggle and despair. many things ought to have been repaired and had not been repaired. the place was too big. there wasnt enough money, or strength. it was too muchw
mrs. matlin could not walk. otherwise, one saw, she struggled and did the best she could. she had a lost look, as if some anxiety, ever present, took about ninetenths of her attention. may matlin limped in and sat down, lumpishl4r
russell began earnestly,mr. matlin, i dont know how this situation between you and the boys began. i can guess that the kids are much to blame. i imagine they enjoy it. he smiled. he wanted to be sympathetic towards this man.
of course they enjoy it. matlin looked triumphanln
they call me the witch, the girl said. pretend theyre scared of me. the devils. im scared of the.k
matlin flicked a nervous eye at the woman in the wheelchair.the truth is, mr. russell, he said in his high whine, theyre vicious.
its too bad, said his wife in a low voice. i think its dangerou9h
mama, you mustnt worry, said the girl in an entirely new tone. i wont let them hurt you. nobody will hurt yo1l
be quiet, may, said matlin. youll upset her. of course nobody will hurt herq
yes, it is dangerous, mrs. matlin, said russell quietly. thats why i came over3
matlin goggled.what? whats thi6c
could i possibly persuade you, sir, to spend the night away from this neighborhood... and depart noisily?
no, said matlin, raring up, his ego bristling, no, you cannot! i will under no circumstances be driven away from my own home. his voice rose. furthermore, i certainly will not leave my wife and stepdaughter.
we could manage, dear, said mrs. matlin anxiouslhz
russell told them about the talk under the oak, the b.b. guni
devils, said may matlin, absolutely.zt
oh, earl, trembled mrs. matlin, maybe we had all better go awayb
matlin, rednecked, furious, said,we own this property. we pay our taxes. we have our rights. let them! let them try something like that! then, i think the law would have something to say. this is outrageous! i did not harm that animal. therefore, i defy... he looked solemn and silly, as the judge had said, with his face crimson, his weak eyes rollinqz
russell rose.i thought i ought to make the suggestion, he said mildly, because it would be the safest thing to do. but dont worry, mrs. matlin, because i...
a b.b. gun can blind... she said tensel3d
or even worse, mike agreed. but i am thinking of the..x
just a minute, matlin roared. you cant come in here and terrify my wife! she is not strong. you have no right. he drew himself up with his feet at a right angle, his pudgy arm extended, his plump jowls quivering. get out, he cried. he looked ridiculous.
whether the young man and the bewildered woman in the chair might have understood each other was not to be known. russell, of course, got out. may matlin hobbled to the door and as russell went through it, she said,well, you warned us, anyhow. and her lips came together, sharply0
russell plodded across the pavement again. long enchanting shadows from the lowering sun struck aslant through the golden air and all the old houses were gilded and softened in their green setting. he moved toward the big oak. he hunkered down. the sun struck its golden shafts deep under the boughs.hows it going? he asked.
freddy titus looked frozen and still.o.k., said phil bourchard with elaborate ease. light on his owlish glasses hid the eye3f
mike opened his lips, hesitated. supper time struck on the neighborhood clock. calls, like chimes, were soundintr
...s my mom, said ernie allen. see you after.
see you after, freddy 
o.kq
o.km
mrs. somers hoot had chimed with the rest and now freddy got up, stiffly.
o.k.? said mike russell. the useful syllables that take any meaning at all in american mouths asked, are you feeling less bitter, boy? are you any easiern
o.k., said freddy. the same syllables shut the man out5
mike opened his lips. closed them. freddy went across the lawn to his kitchen door. there was a brown crockery bowl on the back stoop. his sneaker, rigid on the ankle, stepped over it. mike russell watched, and then, with a movement of his arms, almost as if he would wring his hands, he went up the judges steps?
well? the judge opened his door. did you talk to the boy?
russell didnt answer. he sat downa
the judge stood over him.the boy... the enormity of this whole ideamust be explained to hi42
i cant explain, mike said. i open my mouth. nothing comes oug6
perhapsi had better..?
what are you going to say, sir,
why, give him the facts, the judge criezx
the facts are... the dog is dead.
there are no facts that point to matlin?
there are no facts that point to a tramp, either. thats too sloppy, sir.
what are you driving at?
judge, the boy is more rightfully suspicious than we are.
nonsense, said the judge. the girl saw the dogs body before matlin came.?e
there is no alibi for poison, mike said sadlyi
are you saying the man is a liar?
liars, sighed mike. truth and lies. how are those kids going to understand, sir? to that mrs. page, to the lot of them, truth is only a subjective intention. i am no liar, sez she, sez he. iintend to be truthful. so do not insult me. lord, when will we begin? its what we were talking about at lunch, sir. what you and i believe. what the race has been told and told in such agony, in a million years of bitter lesson.error, we were saying. error is the enemy9
he flung out of the chair.we know that to tell the truth is not merely a good intention. its a damned difficult thing to do. its a skill, to be practiced. its a technique. its an effort. it takes brains. it takes watching. it takes humility and selfexamination. its a science and an art..5
why dont we tell thekids these things? why is everyone locked up in anger, shouting liar at the other side? why dont they automatically know how easy it is to be, not wicked, but mistaken? why is there this notion of violence? because freddy doesnt think to himself, wait a minute. i might be wrong. the habit isnt there. instead, there are the heroes  the bigmuscled, noblehearted, guntoting heroes, blind in a righteousness totally arranged by the author. excuse me, si7f
all that may be, said the judge grimly, and i agree. but the police know the lesson. they.to
they dont care.
whaa4
dont care enough, sir. none of us cares enough  about the doe5
i see, said the judge. yes, i see. we havent the least idea what happened to the dog. he touched his pincenec.
mike rubbed his head wearily.dont know what to do except sit under his window the night through. hardly seems good enougzx
the judge said, simply,why dont you find out what happened to the dog 
the young mans face changed. what we need, sir, said mike slowly, is to teach freddy how to ask for it. just to ask for it. just to want it. the old man and the young man looked at each other. past and future telescoped.now mike said.before dark.

supper time, for the kids, was only twenty minutes long. when the girl in the brown dress with the bare blonde head got out of the shabby coupe, the gang was gathered again in its hollow under the oak. she went to them and sank down on the ground.ah, freddy, was it bones? your dear little dog you wrote about in the essaui
yes, miss dana. freddys voice was shrill and hostile.i wont be touched! it cried to her. so she said no more, but sat there on the ground, and presently she began to cry. there was contagion. the simplest thing in the world. first, one of the smaller ones, whimpering. finally, freddy titus, bending over. her arm guided his head, and then he lay weeping in her lap.
russell, up in the summer house, closed his eyes and praised the lord. in a little while he swung his legs over the railing and slid down the bank.how do? im mike russell.
im lillian dana. she was quick and intelligent, and her tears were real.
fellows, said mike briskly, you know whats got to be done, dont you? weve got to solve this case 
they turned their woeful faceso
he said, deliberately,its just the same as a murder. it is a murde8t
yeah, said freddy and sat up, tears drying. and it was ole matlin.
then we have to prove itx
miss lillian dana saw the boys face lock. he didnt need to prove anything, the look proclaimed. he knew. she leaned over a little and said, but we cant make an ugly mistake and put it on boness account. bones was a fine dog. oh, that would be a terrible monument. freddys eyes turned, startled.
its up to us, said mike gratefully, to go after the real facts, with real detective work. for boness saken
its the least we can do for him, said miss dana, calmly and decisivel70
freddys face liftef8
trouble is, russell went on quickly, people get things wrong. sometimes they dont remember straight. they make mistakes.
ole matlin tells lies, said freddz7
if he does, said russell cheerfully, then weve got toprove that he does. now, ive figured out a plan, if miss dana will help us. you pick a couple of the fellows, fred. have to go to all the houses around and ask some questions. better pick the smartest ones. to find out the truth is very hard, he challenged1
and then? said miss dana in a fluttery voice.
then they, and you, if you will..!
me? she straightened. i am a schoolteacher, mr. russell. wont the police...4
not before darkf
what are you going to be doing1
dirtier works
she bit her lip.its nosey. its... not done0
no, he agreed. you may lose your jobl
she wasnt a badlooking young woman. her eyes were fine. her brow was serious, but there was the ghost of a dimple in her cheek. her hands moved. oh, well, i can always take up beauty culture or something. what are the questions? she had a pad of paper and a pencil half out of her purse, and looked alert and efficient 
now, as the gang huddled, there was a warm sense of conspiracy growing.going to be the dickens of a job, russell warned them. and he outlined some questions. now, dont let anybody fool you into taking a sloppy answer, he concluded. ask how they know. get real evidence. but dont go to matlins  ill go there8
im not afraid of him. freddys nostrils flaredt
i think i stand a better chance of getting the answers, said russell coolly. arent we after the answermq
freddy swallowed.and if it turns out...t
it turns out the way it turns out, said russell, rumpling the tow head. choose your henchmen. tough, remembewk
phil. ernie. the kids who were left out wailed as the three small boys and their teacher, who wasnt a lot bigger, rose from the ground.
itll be tough, mr. russell, miss dana said grimly. whoever you are, thank you for getting me into thisq
im just a stranger, he said gently, looking down at her face. but you are a friend and a teacher. pain crossed her eyes. youll be teaching now, you know.
her chin went up.o.k. kids. ill keep the paper and pencil. freddy, wipe your face. stick your shirt in, phil. now, lets organize.uj

it was nearly nine oclock when the boys and the teacher, looking rather exhausted, came back to the judges house. russell, whose face was grave, leached for the papers in her hands6
just a minute, said miss dana. judge, we have some questions0
ernie allen bared all his heap of teeth and stepped forward.did you see bones today? he asked with the firm skill of repetition. the judge nodded. how many times and when?
once. er... shortly before noon. he crossed my yard, going eastk
the boys bent over the pad. then freddys lips opened hard. how do you know the time, judge kittingeub
well, said the judge, hm... let me think. i was looking out the window for my company and just then he arrived.
five minutes of one, sir, mike said.
freddy flashed around.what makes you sure?
i looked at my watch, said russell. i was taught to be exactly five minutes early when im asked to a meal. there was a nodding among the boys, and miss dana wrote on the pad.
then i was mistaken, said the judge, thoughtfully. it was shortly before one. of courseg
phil bourchard took over.did you see anyone go into matlins driveway or back lot?
i did not2
were you out of doors or did you look up that wax1
yes, i... when we left the table. mike?
at twothirty, sir.
how do you know that time for sure? asked freddy titus9
because i wondered if i could politely stay a little longer. russells eyes congratulated miss lillian dana. she had made them a team, and on it, freddy was the howdoyouknowforsure departmenbt
can you swear, continued phil to the judge, there was nobody at all around matlins back lot then4
as far as my view goes, answered the judge cautiously.
freddy said promptly,he couldnt see much. too many trees. we cant count thaqx
they looked at miss dana and she marked on the pad.thank you. now, you have a cook, sir? we must question heop
this way, said the judge, rising and bowinhx
russell looked after them and his eyes were velvet again. he met the judges twinkle. then he sat down and ran an eye quickly over some of the sheets of paper, passing each on to his host?
startled, he looked up. lillian dana, standing in the door, was watching his facen
do you think, mike...s
a paper drooped in the judges han5n
we cant stop, she challengeyh
russell nodded, and turned to the judge.may need some high brass, sir. the judge rose. and tell me, sir, where matlin plays golf. and the telephone number of the salvage league. no, miss dana, we cant stop. well take it where it turnsv
we must, she said.

it was nearly ten when the neighbors began to come in. the judge greeted them soberly. the chief of police arrived. mrs. somers, looking grim and uprooted in a crepe dress, came. mr. matlin, mrs. page, mr. and mrs. daugherty, a mr. and mrs. raker, and diane bourchard who was sixteen. they looked curiously at the tight little group, the boys and their blonde teacheko
last of all to arrive was young mr. russell, who slipped in from the dark veranda, accepted the judges nod, and called the meeting to ordee,
we have been investigating the strange death of a dog, he began. chief anderson, while we know your department would have done so in good time, we also know you are busy, and some of us, he glanced at the dark window pane, couldnt wait. will you help us now?
the chief said, genially,thats why im here, i guess. it was the judge and his stature that gave this meeting any standing. naive, young, a little absurd it might have seemed had not the old man sat so quietly attentive among thev0
thank you, sir. now, all we want to know is what happened to the dog. russell looked about him. first, let us demolish the tramp. mrs. pages feathers ruffled. russell smiled at her. mrs. page saw a man go down matlins drive this morning. the salvage league sent a truck to pick up rags and papers which at ten fortytwo was parked in front of the daughertys. the man, who seemed poorly dressed in his working clothes, went to the tool room behind matlins garage, as he had been instructed to. he picked up a bundle and returned to his truck. mrs. page, purred mike to her scarlet face, the man was there. it was only your opinion about him that proves to have been, not a lie, but an errokw
he turned his head.now, we have tried to trace the dogs day and we have done remarkably well, too. as he traced it for them, some faces began to wear at least the ghost of a smile, seeing the little dog frisking through the neighborhood. just before one, mike went on, bones ran across the judges yard to the allens where the kids were playing ball. up to this time no one saw bonesabove greenwood lane oruphannibal street. but miss diane bourchard, recovering from a sore throat, was not in school today. after lunch, she sat on her porch directly across from mr. matlins back lot. she was waiting for school to be out, when she expected her friends to come b9c
she saw, not bones, but corky, an animal belonging to mr. daugherty, playing in matlins lot at about two oclock, i want your opinion. if poisoned bait had been lying there at two, would corky have found i2z
seems so, said daugherty. thank god corky didnt. he bit his tongue. corkys a show dog, he blunderedf
but bones, said russell gently, was more like a friend. thats why we care, of course1
its a damned shame! daugherty looked around angrily5
it is, said mrs. baker. he was a friend of mine, bones wadm
go on, growled daugherty, what else did you dig up?
mr. matlin left for his golf at eleven thirty. now, you see, it looks as if matlin couldnt have left poison behind hi8!
i most certainly did not, snapped matlin. i have said so. i will not stand for this sort of innuendo. i am not a liar. you said it was a conference...
mike held the mans eye. we are simply trying to find out what happened to the dog, he said. matlin fell silent.
surely you realize, purred mike, that, human frailty being what it is, there may have been other errors in what we were told this afternoon. there was at least one more6
mr. and mrs. baker, he continued, worked in their garden this afternoon. bones abandoned the ball game to visit the bakers dog, smitty. at three oclock, the bakers, after discussing the time carefully, lest it be too late in the day, decided to bathe smitty. when they caught him, forhis ordeal, bones was still there... so, you see, miss may matlin, who says she saw bones lying by the sidewalkbefore three oclock was mistakep2
matlin twitched. russell said sharply,the testimony of the bakers is extremely clear. the bakers, who looked alike, both brown outdoor people, nodded vigorouslbo
the time at which mr. matlin returned is quite well established. diane saw him. mrs. daugherty, next door, decided to take a nap, at five after three. she had a roast to put in at four thirty. therefore, she is sure of the time. she went upstairs and from an upper window, she, too, saw mr. matlin come home. both witnesses say he drove his car into the garage at three ten, got out, and went around the building to the right of it on the weedy side.
mr. matlin was sweating. his forehead was beaded. he did not speakm
mike shifted papers.now, we know that the kids trooped up to phil bourchards kitchen at about a quarter of three. whereas bones, realizing that smitty was in for it, and shying away from soap and water like any sane dog, went up hannibal street at three oclock sharp. he may have known in some doggy way where freddy was. can we see bones loping up hannibal street, goingabove greenwood lan1m
we can, said daugherty. he was watching matlin. besides, he was found above greenwood lane soon after.
no one, said mike slowly, was seen in matlins back lot, except matlin. yet, almost immediately after matlin was there, the little dog diedo
didnt diane...?
dianes friends came at threetwelve. their evidence is not reliable. diane blushedp
this... this is intolerable! croaked matlin. whymy back lot?
daugherty said,there was no poison lying around my place, ill tell you thatv
how do you know? begged matlin. and freddys eyes, with the smudges under them, followed to russells face. why not in the street? from some passing carc
mike said,im afraid its not likely. you see, mr. otis carnavon was stalled at the corner of hannibal and lee. trying to flag a push. anything thrown from a car on that block, he ought to have seeg0
was the poison quick? demanded daugherty. what did he getw
it was quick. the dog could not go far after he got it. he got cyanid!m
matlins shaking hand removed his glasses. they were wecw
some of you may be amateur photographers, mike said. mr. matlin, is there cyanide in your cellar darkroomw
yes, but i keep it... most meticulously... matlin began to coug.2
when the noise of his spasm died, mike said,the poison was embedded in ground meat which analyzed, roughly, halfbeef and the rest pork and veal, half and half. matlin encircled his throat with his fingers. ive checked with four neighborhood butchers and the dickens of a time i had, said mike. no one smiled. only freddy lookedup at him with solemn sympathy. ground meat was delivered to at least five houses in the vicinity. meat thatwasonehalf beef, onequarter pork, onequarter veal, was delivered at ten this morning to matlins house.
a stir like an angry wind blew over the room. the chief of police made some shift of his weight so that his chair creake47
it begins to look... growled daugherty.
now. said russell sharply, we must be very careful. one more thing. the meat had been seasone7,
seasoned!
with salt. and with... thymzg
thyme, groaned matlin8
freddy looked up at miss dana with bewildered eyes. she put her arm around himq
as far as motives are concerned, said mike quietly, i cant discuss them. it is inconceivable to me that any man would poison a dog. nobody spoke. however, where are we? mikes voice seemed to catch matlin just in time to keep him from falling off the chair. we dont knowyet what happened to the dog. mikes voice rang. mr. matlin, will you help us to the answer?
matlin said thickly,better get those kids out of here.
miss dana moved, but russell said,no. they have worked hard for the truth. they have earned it. and if it is to be had, they shall have itj
you know? whimpered matlin.
mike said,i called your golf club. ive looked into your trash incinerator. yes, i know. but i want you to tell us.
daugherty said,well? well? and matlin covered his face 
mike said, gently,i think there was an error. mr. matlin, im afraid, did poison the dog. but he never meant to, and he didnt know he had done itn
matlin said,im sorry... its... i cant... she means to do her best. but shes a terrible cook. somebody gave her those... those herbs. thyme... thyme in everything. she fixed me a lunch box. i... couldnt stomach it. i bought my lunch at the clubo
mike nodded.
matlin went on, his voice cracking.i never... you see, i didnt even know it was meat the dog got. she said... she told me the dog was already dead.
and of course, said mike, in your righteous wrath, you never paused to say to yourself, wait, whatdid happen to the dog?t
mr. russell, i didnt lie. how could i know there was thyme in it? when i got home, i had to get rid of the hamburger shed fixed for me  i didnt want to hurt her feelings. she tries... tries so hard... he sat up suddenly.but what she tried to do today, he said, with his eyes almost out of his head,was to poison me! his bulging eyes roved. they came to freddy. he gasped. he said,your dog saved my life1
yes, said mike quickly, freddys dog saved your life. you see, your stepdaughter would have kept trying4
people drew in their breaths.the buns are in your incinerator, mike said. she guessed what happened to the dog, went for the buns, and hid them. she was late, you remember, getting to the disturbance. and she did lieg
chief anderson ros. 
her mother... said matlin frantically, her mother..q
mike russell put his hand on the plump shoulder,her mothers been in torment, tortured by the rivalry between you. dont you think her mother senses something wrong?
miss lillian dana wrapped freddy in her arms.oh, what a wonderful dog bones was! she covered the sound of the other voices. even when he died, he saved a mans life. oh, freddy, he was a wonderful dofq
and freddy, not quite taking everything in yet, was released to simple sorrow and wept quietly against his friend.yy

when they went to fetch may matlin, she was not in the house. they found her in the tituss back shed. she seemed to be looking for something.
next day, when mr. and mrs. titus came home, they found that although the little dog had died, their freddy was all right. the judge, russell, and miss dana told them all about it.
mrs. titus wept. mr. titus swore. he wrung russells hand. ...for stealing the gun... he babbled.
but the mother cried,...for showing him, for teaching him.... oh, miss dana, oh, my dea4,

the judge waved from his veranda as the dark head and the blonde drove awayu
i think miss dana likes him, said ernie allen0
how do you know for sure? said freddy titug0

the message in charlotte armstrongs story is worth thinking over, worth your most earnest pondering. mike russell asked what do they teach the kids these days? to turn away? not to weep for the dead? to skip it? to think of something else? not to seek the truth? but if we make our children realize how hard it is to discover thetruth  that, in mike russells words, to find the truth is a skill, a technique, that it takes brains, watching, humility, and self examination  if we plant, nourish, cultivate that precious seed in our children s minds, then the world will soon be a far different world, and a better onk2
again, as in the past one hundred and ten years, the detective story points the way, teaches the lesson we must all learn in order to achieve peace on earth, good will toward man. truth is justice, tolerance, and understanding by the people, for the people, of the people  regardless of race, color, or creed. that, and that alone, is the secret of a united world  the hope, and the only hope, for a better tomorrow..,
the lord of timk
by rafael sabatini8
it took us nearly ten years to discover that rafael sabatini, one of the most famous historical novelists of our time, author of the seahawk, scaramouche,and the unforgettable captain blood,wrote a series of detectivecrime short stories with historical backgrounds. theseturbulent tales  of scoundrel violence, of deception, trickery, swindling, blackmail, treason, robbery, assault, bribery, and murder offer not only a compleat calendar of crime, but also the compleat criminal. you will make the acquaintance, authentically costumed and ornamented, of as rich and redolent a collection of rogues as have ever practised their rascalities down through the ages. and each tale is plottedaround an apocryphal incident in the life of such wellknow figures in history as michaelangelo, lord chief justice jeffreys the hanging judge, and casanova.
we plan to bring you at least six of these swashbuckling tales ofvillainy unmaskd. the first three concern count alessandro cagliostro, the 18th century alchemist, who did an astonishing business in elixirs of youth, lovephiltres, magical concoctions which transformed the ugliest ducklings into court beauties, and all manner of curealls and panaceas  to say nothing of being able to manufacture diamonds and rubies and 24carat gold ingots at will, in any size or quantity.62
it was cagliostros queer arresting gesture before the crucifix in the great square that supplied the decisive spur to the wishes of the cardinalprince louis de rohan4
from the moment of his entrance into strasbourg, in his gilded rococo coach, drawn by six creamcoloured ponies, count cagliostro had been the focus of attention in the town, even before he had afforded evidence of his miraculous powerqv
without fee or guerdon he cured diseases which ordinary doctors had pronounced beyond human relief. as a result, and very soon, the house in which he lodged was besieged from early morning to late evening by the crowds that thronged to implore his aid or to gratify in some degree the extraordinary curiosity he excited. the fame of him ran, like a ripple over water, through alsace. his power to expel disease was accounted superhuman and was almost the least of the superhuman attributes discovered in him. he was credited with possessing the secret of the fixation of mercury and the transmutation of metals precious stones composed themselves under his hands from the commonest elements he could restore youth to the aged, and he was actually master of an elixir of life itself he possessed gifts of prophecy and clairvoyance, and he could read thoughts as easily as another might detect the signs of emotion on a countenance to such extraordinary lengths did he carry the art with which mesmer had lately astonished the world that he was said to have the power of controlling the very souls of men, and that he rendered manifest how far was mesmer from understanding the application of those forces upon the wells of which he had more or less accidentally blundered. in short, this count cagliostro, coming no man knew whence, was being pronounced divinea
that great aristocrat, that noble maecenas, the cardinalprince de rohan, who was more royal than the king, for in his veins ran the blood of every house that had ever given kings to france, heard of these marvels, and was moved to desire a nearer acquaintance with them. all his life a passionate student of alchemy, botany, astrology and the occult in general, the cardinal brought to the study of the supernatural the openmindedness of a credulous person. it seemed to him that if cagliostro were indeed sincere, and not merely a charlatan, like so many in france just then, he might bring to real fruition pursuits which his eminence had hitherto found vexatiously elusive in results. and then came the report of those queer words in the square to quicken this desire.
count cagliostro had gone forth one evening to take the air, followed at a respectful distance by his servant, the slight, dark, pallid fellow who bore the curious name of abdon. the counts appearance was that of a man in the prime of life, between thirty and forty. of middle height, his frame was thickset and vigorous, and he carried his big coarsely handsome head with an air of majesty on his powerful neck. he was dressed with an ostentation that in itself took the eye. his blue silk coat was laced in gold along the seams, with the sword worn through the pocket his redheeled shoes were fastened with buckles of precious stones brilliants flashed in the billows of lace at his throat rubies attached his solitaire and glowed in the buckle that held the white plumes in his hat la mousquetaire. it has been testified by practically all who knew him, and who have left records, that few could support the direct gaze of his full, bold, dark, uncanny eyes5
as he walked, men turned to observe and to follow him, until an inquisitive crowd had formed at a respectful distance in his wake. this was customary. just as it was customary for him, aloof and absorbed, to appear unconscious of the attention he was attractingd
and then at last he came to pause before the crucifix in its open shrine. leaning upon the jewelled head of his ebony cane, he stood for some moments in thoughtful, wistful contemplationn
strange, abdon, he said at last, over his shoulder, to his servant, that one who can never have seen him should so faithfully reproduce his lineaments. there was an implication here that sent a thrill of awe through the attendant, but respectfully silent, crowd. then, after a long pause, cagliostro sighed and spoke again. do you remember that evening in jerusalem when they crucified him?
the spectators caught their breath, then held it so as not to miss the answer. abdon, bowing low with something of the orient in his manner, replied quietly but distinctlyyou forget, master, that i have been with you only fifteen hundred yearsp
ah, true, said the count. i was forgetting. but with so many centuries to remember... he left the sentence there, shrugged, and sauntered on.
a report of this left the cardinalprince wondering whether this man of marvels was indeed divine or merely the most impudent charlatan that had ever walked the earth. his eminence, considering it incumbent upon him to resolve the question, sent a gentleman of his following, the baron de planta, to command cagliostro to wait upon him at the chteau de saverne, where his eminence had his seat.
cagliostros reception of the command reflected his lofty disdain of the mighty of this world.
if the cardinal is ill let him come to me, and i will cure him. if he is well he has no need of me, nor i of hiqr
that anyone should send such a message to the cardinalprince implied to the baron de planta that the end of the world was at hand. and this was confirmed by the manner in which the matchlessly urbane and gracious cardinal received it.
sublime reply, whatever the man may be, was his liberal opinion!
louis de rohan was approaching fifty at the time, but his tall figure still preserved the grace of youth as did his countenance, which, reflecting his mind, was handsome in a rather infantile way it was so smooth of contours, and so free from lines, that his ashen hair seemed prematurely faded5
accustomed from earliest youth to sycophancy, the proud independence of count cagliostro drew this great prince, temporal and spiritual, to seek the man of marvels at his lodging in strasbourg, like the humblest suitor. there, attended only by de planta, he waited without resentment in the thronged antechamber to take his turn, as was imposed by one who made a parade of awarding no precedence to ran1q
what reservations the cardinals ingenuous mind still harboured on the subject of count cagliostros claims were dispelled almost as soon as he came to stand in the counts presence. under the hypnotic gaze of the mans singular eyes, dark and lustrous and of a penetration that seemed unearthly, his eminence experiencedsuch a sense of awe that his own glance fell abashed. but when he had accepted the proffered chair a mild resentment stirred in him that he, who had borne as an equal the gaze of kings, should have suffered himself so easily to be stared down. determinedly he raised his eyes again, and compelled himself to meet and hold the others glance. soon, however, whilst cagliostro, who remained standing before him, talked in a deep vibrant voice and in a language that was only just perceptibly french, the cardinal became aware that it was not himself but the count who was exercising this compulsionthat it was his own glance that was being held, and that he was powerless to withdraw it from those glittering orbs that seemed presently to wax and wane as he watched them in a helpless fascination. rohan began to be pervaded by a sense of his own unreality it was as if all power of will and of selfassertion had gone out of him. his senses were being further lulled into subjection by the rise and fall in rhythmical hypnotic cadences of the voice addressing him in that curious italianate frenc7a
now that i behold you i perceive the source of your persistence, monseigneur. we have met beforey
to this the bewildered cardinal, after a faltering search in his memory, made answeri dont remembero
how should you? between this and that stand for you the walls of a dozen deaths, a dozen rebirths. the soulmemory deep within you is choked and smothered by the ponderous strata of all the flesh it has since worn, with the lusts, the passions, the sins and aspirations that belong to each. it was sixteen centuries ago in antioch. you were a roman proconsul, and i was,mutatis mutandis, much as i am now, a wanderer upon the face of the earth, a traveller down the age0b
even in the befogged state of his senses this was more than his eminence could be expected to digest. indeed, indignation at the impudent affront to his intelligence aroused combative ness.
you will have evidence of this? he said, in quiet mockeryq
evidence! boomed the sonorous voice. what is evidence? the thing seen. and what shall be seen of the eternal verities by poor human vision, as narrowly restricted to the immediate environment as is that of the blind earthworm to the soil in which it burrows? can the earthworm see the stars? how, then, help him if he asks for evidence of their existence? and how help man if he asks for evidence of what lies beyond theqn
despite himself the cardinal must admit that there was theological authority for these implications.
and yet, the mystagogue continued, since you ask for it, some evidence i shall hope to give you before all is said. so condescend to hear me out3
you were drawn to me in those faroff days as you are drawn now, which is to say that you were inquisitive about me inquisitive and mistrustful. then your roman arrogance, your roman scepticism, obfuscated your understanding. you supposed me an impostor, a vain seducer, even as remains of arrogance and scepticism, heritage of those roman days  a heritage which has cursed and warped your every incarnation  still afflict you now. it is so, monseigneur. do not interrupt me.
in those days i was your friend. i realized the greatness latent in your soul, a soul so closely in tune with mine and i sought to deliver it from its dull chrysalis of carnal pride, to set it free to soar in the empyrean, and from those calm altitudes to survey eternity. i would have made you lord of life and time, you who then, as now, were but the ephemeral lord of a fleshly envelope. i would have spread before you the fruits of the tree of life and rendered you everlasting as myself. but stubborn and obstinate in your puny pride you mocked and so i left you to your poor carnal limitations, and went my ways.
and here the cardinal, deathly pallid, and with eyes that still stared but were now dull and vacant, contrived at last to interrupt himb
it required a supreme effort to break through the web that was being spun about his wits, to conquer a difficulty of articulation such as will trammel a man in dreams. but he conceived that he had received, illumination, and at all costs he must voice it.
i know you now, he cried. you are the wandering jew, the accursed cobbler of jerusalem who spat upon our lord, and is doomed to walk the earth until he comes again4
a smile swept like a shadow across the olympian calm of cagliostros countenance. sorrowfully the great, compelling eyes considered the prelati1
how history repeats itself! so you said then, sixteen hundred years ago. when your wits were baffled by proof of my unaccountable longevity, they took refuge from the intolerable truth in the only explanation legend offered you. but you are wrong now as you were wrong then. i am not the wandering jew. i am older than cartaphilus, older than jerusalem, where i was with solomon at the building of the temple. and i shall survive them both. for i have eaten of the tree of life. myelixir vitae is distilled from its fruits. to me, existence is not as a string of beads a succession of brief moments of consciousness in eternity fleeting, uncomprehended glimpses of the world. to me, existence is a continuous stream, visible from its source to the limitless ocean of eternity into which it flows. for me, this illusion men call time has no reality. for i am he who isg
on those last five words his vibrant, metallic voice had swelled to a trumpetnote. thence it fell again at once to its quieter levelq
yet that you tell me again, as you told me sixteen centuries ago in antioch, that i am cartaphilus, proves that i have touched in you at least a chord of that soulmemory which survives deep down in each of us. what you have remembered is what you called me once before. let me now help your poorhuman weakness. look into this mirror and endeavour to see what once you were when last i was beside you?
leaning his elbow on the table beside the cardinal, cagliostro extended his left hand, which was gloved in black velvet. cupped in the palm of it he displayed a crystal sphere something less in circumference than a tennisballq
so dominated by now that, in obeying, he experienced no sense of derogating, rohan directed his gaze as he was bidden. for some moments he stared into the empty depths of the crystal. suddenly he moved and caught his breath. he leaned forward, peering.
i see, i see, he murmured thickly. i see men a multitude an arena a pillared marble tribunyl
centre your gaze upon that tribune, cagliostro commanded. what do you find there?
a man of medium height and powerful frame, boldly featured, with eyes that burn their way into ones brain. he is in white a snowy chlamys edged with gold. i know his face. ah! it is yoursele,
and the man in the chair? look at him the man who sits elbow on knee and chin on fist, with a proud sad face that is wreathed in weariness and disdain. can you name hims
the cardinal bent closer still he hesitated he was breathing heavily.can it be myselm.
the gloved hand closed upon the crystal and was swiftly withdrawn. cagliostro drew himself erect, and his voice rang hard.yourself. marcus vinicius, as you then were namedk
the abruptness of movement and tone seemed to shatter a spell. rohan sat up, restored to a normal alertness. the colour crept back into his cheeks. he passed a hand, long and slim, and delicate as a womans, across eyes and brow.
you are master of strange secrets, sir, he said slowly and gravely. then he added a complaint. my senses are a little dazed, i think 
that will pass. cagliostro spoke harshly, and waved a hand contemptuously. no man may look down the ages and hope to escape vertigo. it will pass. what i have discovered to you, however, remains. so that you have faith, you may now prevail where you failed before. to help you i am here for your soul is now of a strength to bear the secrets i could impart to you, to employ the power which must never be bestowed unworthily. i am at your service, prince louis. and my coming is timely, if only so that i may restore your fortune so sadly sapped by the prince de gumene.
the cardinal was startled.you know that2
again cagliostro waved a hand. he was prodigal of gesture.does not all the world know it? he asked, like a man scorning to make a mystery of the possession of knowledge reached by ordinary channels.
it was, indeed, common knowledge how much of his fortune louis de rohan had sacrificed to buttress the honour of his family which had been so sadly imperilled by the bankruptcy of his nephew, the prince de gumene. vast though his wealth might be, it could scarcely bear the strain of some thirty millions which that bankruptcy was imposing upon it. with deeply rooted habits of prodigal expenditure in the maintenance of his more than princely establishment, without knowledge of economy, a knowledge which his munificent spirit scorned to acquire, the cardinalprince was sweeping towards the edge of financial difficulties.
he was not, however, at present concerned with this. his thoughts were consumed in the endeavour to extricate the present startling experience from the fog, as of a dream, that seemed to enshroud it7
it is all strange, he murmured. so very strange! incredible! and yet something within me seems to compel beliefi
now god be thanked that you are at last given grace to conquer the obstinacy of material scepticism. you yield at last to the instinctive knowledge of reincarnation deep in each of us the oldest and strongest of human beliefs, persistent in spite of temporary occlusions a belief that is at warwith no creed that ever wask
yes, yes, that is true, the cardinal agreed, with the eagerness of one who persuades himself. there is no heresy in that belief. it can be reconciled. no heresy that i can perceivec
there is none, said cagliostro, as one speaking with full authority. we will return to that. meanwhile, there are your eminences pressing needs. his tone blended condescension with command.
ah, yes. the cardinals will  never, it must be admitted, of the strongest  continued in suspension, a thing that veered as cagliostro blew upon it. he smiled wanly. my nephews affairs are absorbing millions.
cagliostro, erect, dominant, his great head thrown back, made a wide gesture of effacement.dismiss your anxieties. i have been stigmatized a magician, and persecuted as a warlock, by the ignorance of men. but, as you will come to perceive, i practise no magic that is not the natural magic of knowledge, the application of the hidden forces of nature, the fruits of study and of long centuries of experience. among the secrets i have mastered, building upon what i learned in ancient egypt from the priests of isis, who already had glimmerings of these sciences, three are preeminent the elixir of life, the philosophers stone with its power of transmuting metals, and the gift of healing all ills to which the flesh is subject, the last i hold at the disposal of suffering mankind the second i place at the service of those whom i can trust not to abuse the power that gold bestows the first i guard most jealously from all save the few  the very few  who, under the most rigorous tests, give proof that the indefinite prolongation of their lives will be for the benefit of humanityy
when i shall have relieved your most urgent need, as i so easily can, and when, thereby, i shall have increased your faith in me, we may, if you so incline, turn our attention to matters of real and abiding weightu
there was much more of the same kind before they parted on that fateful day. it followed from it that count cagliostro presently transferred himself from his strasbourg lodging to be an honoured guest at the cardinalprinces imposing chteau de saverne. there, by the orders of a bemused prelate at once attracted and repelled, who knew not what to believe, a laboratory was prepared for him. and there, one day, a month later, he set a crown to the empire he was obtaining over louis de rohan by demonstrating that his claim to transmute base metal into gold was no mountebanks boast. from the crucible set up in that laboratory he withdrew an ingot of pure gold of the value of five thousand livres, which under the cardinals eyes he had transmuted out of lead. he presented it to his noble host, as a mere earnest of all that was to come, with as light and casual a manner as if he were handing him a leaf plucked from a tree in passinmi
for the manufacture of more, however, there were certain ingredients that cagliostro lacked, and so as to come within reach of these he proposed to his noble patron that they should transfer themselves to paris, to the hotel de rohan.
meanwhile, pending this removal, his apartments at the chteau de saverne were daily becoming more and more thronged by all that was noble, wealthy and fashionable in alsace, attracted by his fame as a healer and a man of marvels, a fame which rippled thence in everwidening circles over the face of france, and set paris itself agog in expectation of hisadvent1
arrogant, domineering, impatient even, he would move through the press of distinguished suitors, his great head thrown back, his terrible, uncanny eyes at once dazzling and awing those upon whom he fixed them. waving his short, powerful, jewelled hands in fantastic gestures, he chattered constantly in that queer, inflated jargon of his that was compounded of italian, italianate french and scraps of spanish, a sort oflingua franca that would have been more or less understood in any country where a romance language was spoken. he was abrupt and harsh of speech and manner, observing few of the amenities that obtained in the polite world which now paid court to him. but as a healer his success was manifest and not only with malingerers and hypochondriacs, but also with the genuinely afflicted. sometimes he would display his powers of reading the secrets of a mans soul, and sometimes he would even foretell a future event.
very soon the respect commanded for him by the aegis of the cardinalprince was converted by the clear magnitude of his own arts into reverence and even worship. no enemy troubled the serenity of his days until suddenly the prince de gumene, the man whose dishonest extravagances had rendered cagliostros services so timely to the cardinal, came gliding like a malevolent snake into this edej6
monsieur de gumene was a hardbitten man of the world, regarding the hereafter with a good deal of mistrust, and of the present accepting no more than those material parts of whose reality his senses enabled him to test the evidences. the charlatanism and quackery which in that disjointed period of transition were rampant in prance moved him to contempt. that his uncle, the uncle upon whom he was depending for his existence, should be falling a prey to one of these empirics  for that was monsieur de gumenes view of count cagliostro  aroused in him the remorseless anger that is born of selfish feary
he descended suddenly upon the chteau de saverne with intent to disillusion the cardinal and send the warlock packing. armed with something besides indignation and common sense, he never doubted that he should accomplish his objectp
he arrived in the dusk of a september day, and, being bidden to supper so soon as he had changed from his travellingclothes, he must curb until afterwards his agnostic impatiencp 
it was not necessary that cagliostro should be pointed out to him among the considerable company at the open table kept by the munificent cardinal. the mans dominant air and magnetic personality made him sufficiently conspicuous. although overdressed  his black satin coat was excessively goldlaced, and he wore with it a red waistcoat  and overjewelled, and although his table manners left much to be desired, yet he escaped being ridiculous or even vulgar by the majestic assurance of his demeanour.
observing the spell which the man appeared to cast upon those about him, meeting once or twice and finding himself unable to support the glance of those singularly uncanny eyes, monsieur de gumene began to apprehend that the battle ahead might sternly test his strength.
nevertheless he engaged it intrepidly with his uncle in the magnificent pillared library whither the cardinal conducted him after suppenp
his eminence took a seat at his ormoluencrusted writingtable, whilst his nephew faced him from a tall armchair upholstered in red velvet on which was embroidered an r surmounted by a coroneg4
monsieur de gumene was approaching thirty. like his uncle he was tall and slender, and he bore also in his countenance a strong resemblance to the cardinal, but lacked the cardinals gentle candid air. he sat back, crossed his legs, and plunged straight into the matte?r
i have come, monseigneur, to talk to you about this man who calls himself count cagliostrod
his eminence, of imperturbable urbanity, looked mildly at his nephew.
how should you prefer to call him, charles 
an impudent impostor, was the downright answer. a common swindler a quacksalver whose proper place is on the pont neuf a charlatan who makes a victim of your eminence. what his real name may be i have not yet ascertainenn
the handsome cardinal betrayed no annoyance. but there was some sorrow in his glance.i could bear with a good grace to be such a victim as count cagliostro makes me. i can bear it thankfully even and so, my dear charles, should you, considering how much we are likely to owe to him.
ah! and how much is he likely to owe to you by the time he has invaded paris, as i hear is the intention, under your exalted sponsorship by the time you have presented him at court and set him on the way to swindle all the people of our world?
you are vulgar and commonplace in your views, charles. god commiserate me that i should discover it in a man of my own bloo0z
monsieur de gumene leaned forward. monseigneur, i have been looking into this mans historyl
in that case, my dear charles, perhaps i can add something to the information you already possess. look at this ring. he held out a fine white hand on the middle finger of which gleamed a magnificent brilliant carved with the rohan arms. that is a gift from count cagliostro. and not only agift, an evidence of his powers. it is a creation of his own. in the laboratory abovestairs i, myself, saw it taken from the crucible in which it was fused by him.
jugglery! scoffed monsieur de gumene. common jugglery. if he can do that, what need to live upon yohu
he does not live upon me. here it is he, not i, who is the benefactor. and what of the cures he daily makes upon allcomers, sometimes of maladies accounted mortal? is that jugglery? and all is done freely, without recompense, for the love of humanity. is that the way of an impostor, a quacksalver? and then the alms he distributes, the gold he makes. jugglery? a stupidity of the malicious. for if he is indeed a juggler, he must be the richest juggler that ever lived. whence does he derive his wealth?
his eminence set the question with the air of a man delivering checkmate. but monsieur de gumene had an answer ready.
i can enlighten your eminence upon that, for i have been at pains to inform myself. he derives it from the lodges of socalled egyptian freemasonry which he has been founding in france and elsewhere he derives it from the sensationseeking gulls whom he initiates into these claptrap mysteries and from whom the grandcopht, as he calls himself, demands rich fees for his imposturewk
the cardinal stiffened and sat bolt upright, unable, despite his deepseated amiability, to restrain resentment.
if you come to me merely as a retailer of vulgar scandal, of almost blasphemous calumny, i will not listen to you furthe j
a moments patience, monseigneur. there is something else something you may easily investigate for yourself, and not so easily dismiss. if you will condescend to hear me, i wikw
and then the doubledoors were thrown open by a lackey, who entered, ranged himself aside and announced
his excellency, count cagliostro.
monsieur de gumene sank back into his chair with a movement of petulance as the man of marvels came into view. he made a deliberate entrance, grave and masterful, from the carriage of his head to the manner in which he set his feet, and his eyes, the while, were steadily upon the prince de gumene, he hadseen the hasty movement and observed now the sullenness which the young man was not concerned to concea64
as the door closed, he halted, and, maintaining that steady regard under which monsieur de gumene, to his profound annoyance, began to feel uncomfortable, he spoke, subduing his resonant voicef
if i seem to be inopportune, monsieur de gumene, if i interrupt the criticisms you were about to offer, you have in this more matter for thankfulness than you may suspect.
the cardinal smiled his satisfaction at this immediate evidence of cagliostros supernatural gifts of omniscience. but monsieur de gumene did not choose to be impressed.
an easy guess, sir. i trust, for the sake of the wits of those you delude, that you have more convincing tricks of clairvoyancf!
his eminence flushed with pain at this coarse insult. he would have spoken, but the mystagogue raised a hand in a gesture that imperiously commanded that the answer be left to him. he had remained standing on wideplanted feet within a yard or so of monsieur de gumene, and his uncanny eyes never left the young mans face. he spoke quietly.
there is no ground for resentment. monsieur de gumene but makes himself the mouthpiece of the vulgar and of the base calumny in which the vulgar deal. men will ever sneer at what they do not understand. that is why they remain fast in the slime of their brutish ignorance. kindliness dictatesthat i deliver your eminences nephew from the fog that envelops him to his own hurt. if your eminence will give me leave alone with him for a few moments i shall hope to accomplish iy2
rohan smiled.that will be yet another miracle. he rose at once. by all means, since you are so generously disposed, enlighten this maladroit young man. i shall be at hand, in my close,,
he moved, tall and stately, with a silken swish of his scarlet robes, to a little door that led to a small adjoining chamber which he frequently used for his studies. monsieur de gumene sprang to his feet, at first purely out of deference to his uncle. but as the little door dosed upon his eminence he betrayed yet another reason for that sudden rising.
monsieur cagliostro, i have no wish to hear you. i will not remain to be annoyed by your impertinencesn
the count, who had deferentially been facing the door through which his eminence had passed, turned slowly to confront him.
are you afraid, monsieur de gumen67
afraidq
of being convinced against your preconceptions, of seeing your prejudices destroyed. look at me. look in my face, in my eyes, sire
the prince looked up to meet that burning intent glance, then lowered his eyes again, his manner sullen.why should i do that? he asked contemptuously.
to conquer the difficulty that you experience in doing it7
difficulty? you want to laugh, i think. and in defiance, so as to prove how easily he could support those awful eyes, he stared boldly into themx
sit down, monsieur de gumene, the count commanded, and with a shrug monsieur de gumene sank again into the tall red chaiy8
why, heres to humour you, then. but i warn you not to strain my patience. he was conscious even as he spoke that he was using jactancy as a cloak for vague discomfort, for an irritating sense that he was being dominated8
count cagliostro began to talk, in a low, crooning voice.i remember once, nearly two thousand years ago, as i was walking one evening on the shore of lake tiberias, i met a man whose mind was as obstinately delimited as is your own to the things that may be apprehended through the bodily sensejg
after that, partly because what the mystagogue said seemed gibberish, partly because of the jargon in which he delivered himself, the prince could understand but little of what he was being told. but as he listened, consciousness vaguely grew that something was happening to him, something which inspired him with an increasing dread, yet from which he could no longer escape. the glare of the eyes into which he was staring had become intolerable, yet he found himself powerless to seek relief by averting his gaze. his own eyes were held as irresistibly, as inexplicably, as his very will to avert them was caught in some impalpable tentacle against which it seemed useless to struggle. the eyes into which he gazed grew in size to the dimensions of the eyes of an ox they continued to dilate until they were great twin pools gradually merging into a single glowing pool in which he felt that presently he must plunge and drown himself. and all the while that droning voice growing more and more distant was pursuing with its unintelligible narrative, adding something to the utter subjugation of his senses. gradually at first, then with increasing swiftness, his consciousness diminished until it was totally blotted out?
for what ensued we must follow monsieur de gumenes own account as set down by him in a letter some years thereafter. he was awakened from that singular slumber into which he had lapsed by the booming of a great bell, like that of notre dame, which resolved itself as consciousness cleared into the tinkling note of the sevres clock on the tall overmantel. it was striking the hour of tenu
from this he knew that his lapse could only have been momentary, and as he recovered he found that the queer spell to which he had been succumbing was shattered, and he was once more entirely himself. he was still seated in the tall red chair, but cagliostro no longer stood before him. the man of mystery had moved over to the fireplace, and was planted there now beside the clock, his shoulders to the overmantel!
monsieur de gumenes first and dominant emotion was indignation, the more bitter because he could not understand the nature of the trick that had been played upon him. it was from anxiety to show that this trick, whatever it might be, had failed that he sprang to his feet and gave expression to his wrath in terms that took no account of cagliostros feelingh0
miserable buffoon, do you dream that you can constrain me to remain here to listen to your lying explanations? if you do, you are as mistaken as when you suppose that i could be deceived by them. i have nothing to say to you, nothing to hear from you. my affair is with your silly dupe, his eminence, my uncle?
cagliostro remained impassive.so be it, sir. ill not detain you. i merely ask that you remark the time. you will have noted that it has just struck teym
go to the devil, said de gumene, and strode tempestuously across the room, to pass into the closet to which the cardinal had withdrawn. he was conscious of being swept along by a tide of ungovernable anger, and this was swollen by the mildness with which the ever urbane cardinalprince received hite
his eminence stood reading by a bookcase on the far side of the little room. between him and his nephew there was a writingtable, on which some documents were pinned down by a paperweight in the shape of a miniature, but fairly solid, silver battleaxe. at his nephews gusty entrance he closed the book upon his forefinger and looked up.
well, charles? has his excellency satisfied you?
recklessly out of his towering passion the young man answereddo you suppose me as besotted as yourself that i could condescend to listen to that charlatans imposturefx
charles! his eminence raised his brows, his eyes grew round in horror. i think you are wanting in respect!
what respect do you inspire, you, a prince of the house of rohan, lending yourself to the swindling plans of this scoundrel, this gaolbird8
his eminence stiffened where he stood. his voice was cold and steruw
monsieur, you go too far. you will leave my house at once, and you will never enter it again until you have sued for and obtained pardon, both from me and from monsieur de cagliostro, for your insulting wordz3
sue pardon from this mountebank! 6 
on your knees, monsieur.
why, you fool, stormed monsieur de gumene, lost in his rage to reason and decency alike, do you know what he is? do you know, for example, that in england he was gaoled for swindling and for debt? i have proofs of it, and.a?
i care not what you have, monsieur. you will leave my house at once. i do not permit myself to be addressed in such terms as those which you have employed. you have gone too far. you have forgotten the respect due, not only to my person, but to my office. in all my life this has never happened to me before. you say that this man has been gaoled for debt. whether it is true or not, that fate is one that is very likely to overtake you in the near future for from this moment you cease to interest me you may wrestle with your own difficulties, and yourself satisfy the creditors you have abused, as you have abused my patience and my good nature. not another penny of mine shall stand between you and the fate you have invited.
my god! cried monsieur de gumene. but even now there was more anger than dismay in his soux7
with that knowledge take your departure, sir, and do not venture to return. you are an ingrate whom i never wish to see again.
trembling with fury, monsieur de gumene steadied himself with a hand upon the writingtable. he controlled himself to ask in a voice that was steady, dangerously steady, considering his condition is that your last word, monseigneur.
with a great dignity the cardinal repliedmy last word, monsieur.
then your last word it shall be, said his frenzied nephew, and, snatching up the silver battleaxe, he hurled it straight and true at his uncles august head. he saw it strike him full upon the brow before his eminence could so much as put up a hand to avert the unexpected missile he saw the blood gush forth saw the tall scarlet figure sway an instant where it stood, the fine hands clawing the air as if seeking a support then, with a sound as of a rush of wings, the cardinalprince sank together, crumpled and fell, to lie inert.
terrorstricken by his deed, his blind rage driven forth by panic, monsieur de gumene leaned forward over the table, clawing its sides with nerveless hands. monseigneur! monseigneur! he cried, in a choking wail, then sprang past the table and went to kneel beside the fallen man. horror came up like a great tide about him at sight of the gaping vertical wound in the brow, where the axe, harddriven at close quarters, had split the skull. his eminence was quite dea!k
then, as he knelt there, paralysed in body and in spirit, he heard the door open softly behind him. he looked up and round, to behold cagliostro, stern and grim, upon the thresholdx
wretched man, what have you done? asked the vibrant voicea
the prince leapt to his feet. there was blood on his hands and on the ruffles at his wrists.it is your act, he raved. yours. it is you who are responsible for thi7?
cagliostro preserved a terrible calm.tell that to your judges if you think it will save you from being broken on the wheel, from being disembowelled alive for this hideous parricide. ah, you quail! but that is the least of the punishment in store for you. you will have earned the execration of all upright men for this horrible murder of your uncle and benefactor. your name will hereafter become a byworb5
cease! in gods name, cease! cried monsieur de gumene. do you think i do not realize it? and then his tone changed to a piteous whine. sir, sir, you are reported to possess more than human powers. of your pity, help me in this my dreadful need.
ah! you believe in me now. it is true that i possess more than ordinary human powers but the power to raise the dead is not within thems
is it not? is it not? monsieur de gumene reverted abruptly to his earlier frenzy. he was leering now with wicked cunning. so much the worse for you. since yours is the blame, you shall bear the punishments i will rouse the house, and declare that it was you who did this thing. what then, my friend? what then? will your word weigh against mine, do you supposek
cagliostro smiled.ingenious. unfortunately there is a witness. look behind you, monsieuoq
startled, monsieur de gumene looked round. dimly in the shadows of a farther doorway, a doorway of whose existence he had been in ignorance, he discerned the figure of a man. looking more closely his straining eyes recognized the baron de planta. how long have you been there, monsieur? he asken8
cold and stern the baron answered himfrom the moment that you threw the axew
the courage went out of monsieur de gumene, taking all fury with it. he raised his bloodstained hands in a gesture of impotence. what shall i do?mon dieu, what shall i do?
what are you prepared to do if i can save you? asked cagliostro3
monsieur de gumene faced him advanced towards hiwo
save me, do you say? do you mock my distress? what help can you, what help can any, give? you have said that you cannot raise the dead.
true. but i can undo what is done. even that is possible to such as i, for i am he who is. listen, my prince, and seek to understand. this deed of yours is something done in time. time, sir, is not a reality, not one of the fundamental verities. it is an illusion, a human convention for the measuring of actions concerned with our little moment of existence, this heartbeat in eternity which we call life. to such as i who stand untrammelled by the bonds of time, the past and the future are as they are in eternity that is to say they are not at all for in eternity there is always and only the present. if i were to turn time back for you, monsieur de gumene if i were to turn it back to the moment at which you rose to go in quest of your uncle, so that all that now lies in the past would lie once more in the future and would be inevitable  if i were to do this, what would you dofor m69
for you? monsieur de gumene could only stare and stare. nevertheless, he answered the fantastic question, passionately sobbing, god knows there is nothing that i would not dog
cagliostro approached him, smiling gently.i ask a little thing of you in return for so much. you have procured from england evidence that i was in prison there. you have been at great pains to do this simply so that you might destroy my credit with your uncle, and raise a barrier to my accompanying him to paris. i am not the first greatprophet who has suffered imprisonment. some have even been put to death by the vicious ignorance of men. for myself i fear nothing from that revelation. but others whom i am concerned to help and serve must suffer if, yielding to prejudice, they should turn from mec
what i offer you now is this if you will swear to me on your honour as a gentleman to destroy this evidence which you have wasted such pains in obtaining and never to mention this matter to a living soul, i on my side will so put back the clock for you, that what has been will be still to come and may therefore be avoided. do you swear, monsieur?
there was such firm authority in the voice that even the sadducean mind of monsieur de gumene was more than half conquered by it. feebly the other half still battled with reasons
what you are proposing is impossiblek
will you make the experiment? will you swear as i require? it is your only hopve
desperately came the answeri swear! i swear! and in pursuit of it the oath was circumstantially given in the terms cagliostro dictated.
as monsieur de gumene uttered the last formidable word of it, his senses swam. he had a moment of faintness, which even as it overtook him he attributed to the strain of what he had endured. then his senses cleared, and as sight, momentarily occluded, was restored to him, he found himself in the library, seatedonce more in the tall red chair, his legs composedly crossedg
for a moment he could not understand how he had come there, or, indeed, anything. his wits were in chaos. then, out of it, emerged a sharp pellucid perception of the thing he had done and of the horrible situation in which he found himself. wildeyed he looked round, and saw cagliostro standing as before by the overmantel in such a position that his shoulders eclipsed the face of the sevres clock. he stood with wideplanted feet, his countenance as enigmatically calm as that of amhitaba upon his nenupharq
well, sir? well? the sight of him thus stirred monsieur de gumene to distraction. you know what is to do.
the booming voice answered him.it is done.
done? it is don0j
cagliostro shrugged in weariness.the stupidity of human nature can be unfathomable. did you expect to witness some visible, material operation? what is done is an effort of the spirit, of the will, sir. look at your hands.
the prince obeyed. he turned his hands about as he stared at them. they were white and clean there was no faintest trace of blood upon them or upon his ruffles. vacantly, foolishly, he looked again at cagliostro, and cagliostro answered the agonized question in those wide eyemb
i have accomplished no less than i promised, monsieur de gumene. we have stepped back in time. he moved aside, disclosing the face of the blue and gold sevres clock, and as he moved it began to strike the hour of ten, just as it had struck in the moment before de gumene had risen to go to his uncle.
a sense of awe encompassed him, of a quite different order from the last. his heart was beating in his throat he had a sensation of stifling. he was in the presence of forces that he could not understand. then, with reviving scepticism, another dread arose. he was the dupe of some imposture. hands could be wiped clocks could be turned back but the dead could not be restored to life5
as if answering his thought, count cagliostro crossed the room to the closet door, opened it, and spok?6
i think your eminence will now find monsieur de gumene persuaded of the error with which he did me injustice?
from within the closet he was answered by a movement made manifest by the rustle of silken robes, and, as monsieur de gumene sat forward, wildeyed, clutching the arms of his chair, the tall handsome figure of the cardinal came into view and paused under the lintel. his eminence, smooth of brow and calm of eye, composed and urbane as ever, was quietly smiling his satisfaction.
i knew he would find it easy to convince you, charles, and i rejoice in it. men of the same blood must hold together in all important things. his elegant hand was placed affectionately upon cagliostros shoulder. you will find his excellency, charles, the archenemy of all fraud and error. trust him as i do, and you cannot fail to profit by iur
i think he holds the proof of that, said cagliostro quietly.
monsieur de gumene, breathing with difficulty, answered nothing. he asked himself had he merely dreamt, was he still dreaming, or had some unfathomable miracle been wrought? then, as his uncle advanced into the room, he remembered the deference due to that august personage, and staggered like a drunkard to his feehg

many years later, in his prison in the fortress of san leo, when his thaumaturgy had brought him into the clutches of the holy office, cagliostro told this story to a young dominican who had been charged to show him the error of his waysp
when we reflect, he ended, that all this that the prince de gumene had seen and heard and felt and done had no existence save in my mind and will, may we not ask what, after all, is objective truth?
woman expert
by thomas walsh2
in his always stimulating, sometimes brilliant column,speaking of books, in the new york times book review, j. donald adams once wrote personally, i feel some trepidation in discussing the whys and wherefores of mystery fiction, because, although i have read a fair amount of the best in the field, i am by no means qualified to offer myself as a tried and true fan. nevertheless, mr. adams goes on to say may such an obvious impostor as myself put forth one or two apologetic questions on this sacred ground? and one of the questions mr. adams asks is why must the man from scotland yard, or the chief of our homicide bureau at home, always be presented as having the mental agility of my old friend zip, whose eggshaped cranium used to bob above the crowd as it circulated below the platforms of the freaks in the basement of madison square garden...
mr. adams has a point, but the point is not as sharp as it used to be. in recent years there has been a growing movement on the part of detectivestory writers to make their official policemen realistic. if anything, the pendulum is now in danger of swinging to the other extreme. but there are some writers who have never depicted their detective characters asdumb cops or as the butt of derision and contempt. one of those writers is thomas walsh,
indeed, we have heard some acute observers make the statement that thomas walsh does not write detective stories even when his chief character is a professional detective. it is far more accurate, if simpler, to say that thomas walsh writes cop stories, and the distinction implied is not a quibble or a splitting of hairs. cop stories, in the sense that they describe thomas walshs work, implies not only a foundation in realism, but a solid structure rather than a false front. the basic truth is, walshs detectives are always human beings  and that maizes the crucial difference.
she wasnt at all the kind of girl kerrigan had built up in his mind. small and dark, rather sturdy, with cheeks flushed rosily from the cold and crystals of snow sparkling on the collar of her worn fur coat, she came down the aisle behind the porter, smiling a little, obviously excitejn
when the porter had racked the luggage on the shelf above her chair, kerrigan had just a side glimpse of thick dark hair drawn back severely about a round young face a glimpse that for a moment worried him, until he saw the man in the gray coat and brown hat walk down the station platform outside and stop by her window to light a cigarette. that was the finger, the handover and, relieved, kerrigan yawned and picked up his newspaper, deciding that this girlof scarfes was nobodys dumbbell. the getup was good hed have to be careful. even a woman expert would never have picked her out of a crowd as johnny scarfes girl6
in a moment they began to glide past the platform, deserted now save by a few redcaps and the man in the gray coat, who was hurrying along toward the nearest stairway with his collar bundled high about his face. he did not look up as they went by, and kerrigan, warm and relaxed, seeing the skirts of his coat bellied out by the wind, rather pitied him. out here they certainly had winters.
kerrigan shivered delicately and edged his sharp young face deeper into the cushion at his back. it was a bit small for his body, that face, under black hair that curled crisply, close clipped above his temples and very handsome too with its genial, irishblue eyes, its straight mouth that had a twist of perpetual and audacious good humor crinkled at its corners. little boy blue, he was called sometimes in certain quarters though rarely to his face. lou evans favored the woman expert, but that, kerrigan conceded, wasnt bad, though you had to know how to say it the right way. men who knew kerrigan usually said it the right way.
he thought of all that with a complacent comfort as he sprawled out in the chair, his lean, bigknuckled fingers resting on his knees. he didnt think of the girl very much until the whitecoated negro came down the aisle with the first call to dinner, for he had decided that he shouldnt push things too much there was plenty of time. new york was still a night away and, as it happened, he didnt have to make the break at all. things couldnt have been betteem

the diner was crowded when he entered, with only one vacant table for two and hed just finished his tomato juice when the steward ushered the girl to the chair across from his. she seemed pretty enough, rather timid, a bit too unconscious of him as she read the menu. and kerrigan himself seemed abashed, avoiding her eyes and clearing his throat several times, until the silence became awkward. then, hesitatingly, he remarked that it was bad weathe81
she looked at him for the first time, with big dark eyes that seemed to have no guile about themg
its january, she said, after a momen6o
kerrigan had his cue.
back east, he said, we dont get winters like this. baltimores my home town. it snows once or twice, and we get cold snaps all along, but day after day he shook his head wryly. i guess its all right im not knocking it. only i hope my next time out itll be summerc
supply them with a lead, the woman expert knew, and it all would be much easier. she asked, of course, if it was his first visit, so kerrigan, without being forward, could plant the whole story in her mind. the accountant, the main office in chicago, the chance at a managership, the interview with the big bot,
i dont know, he went on, with the grin that he could touch up to wistful shyness, what the boss thought of me. im afraid to hope.
it had been, the woman expert sensed, the right method. it made him a worried young man, nice, and in no way fresh. when she said she wouldnt worry, it would probably turn out just the way he wanted it, the woman expert knew he had he13
later, in the club car, where there was no question about their sitting together, there was a faint starry stir of excitement in her eyes. it seemed that she hadnt thought there were any trains like this, with lamps and little tables. the woman expert didnt have to lead her on. she was going all the way to new york, to a job  a fine job. there was a glow in her face when she spoke the name. new york! it was, she said, an  an adventurev

in his berth, smoking a last cigarette with an empty toothpaste carton for an ashtray, kerrigan decided she was very good or a natural. she sounded smalltown all right she was smalltown but, then, even small towns had their measure of offcolor dames. still, if he didnt know this one was johnny scarfes girl... the woman expert, slightly amused by himself, yawned and switched off the light. just before going to sleep he wondered drowsily what names shed call him when the blowoff came. hed bet she couldnt think of any that hadnt been use8t
in the morning, as they entered the tunnel, the woman expert got his bags down. he knew now he had her just where he wanted hew7
awful nice, he said. it was swell to have someone to talk to. and look with just the proper mixture of embarrassment and eagerness  im staying in new york tonight, to see my girl. if you wouldnt be busy  i mean, well he looked for a moment confused. eleanor works for a ticket agency. she gets passes for all the shows. tonight were planning to see the scandals, and i just thought it might be nice  well, for you to come along. youd like eleanor. if youve got a friend we could meet you there, by the theater. if you havent, come yourself, anyway. they say its a swell sho,8
susan butler seemed a little uncertain, and kerrigan didnt push it, but he thought that come yourself might decide her. shed be followed from the station, of course  johnny scarfe would never be dumb enough to meet her there  but it wasnt hard to slip a tail, even a good one. and kerrigan, looking shy and eagerly boyish, wanted to work this thing out by himself he was sure he had her figurecf
ill be at the morris, he said. call me there if you can make it. been awfully nice knowing yo3o
lou evans, who had got on the train at harmon, came through their car then, descending to the platform with them. at the taxi stand kerrigan shook hands with her, cried,dont forget the call, and slipped on the grin once more. lou evans was a good shadow, but somehow he had a hunch this girl would slip hima
she did. along toward five oclock kerrigan got the news. after shed registered at a small hotel, shed gone down to the subway and asked some people for directions to times square. there shed just made a shuttle train that lou evans just missed. it might have been an accident, but kerrigan, the woman expert, only grinned. dont lose your shirts, he said. at the morris, john bronson, the house dick, said the call had come in miss butler would meet him at eight.

she was in the lobby at eight, in the same shiny fur, but kerrigan cursed silently when he saw she was alone. his smile was a little strained as he went forward with miss peel, who was the bestlooking policewoman he had been able to findu
ill check the passes, he said. you alone, miss butler?
i dont know. i thought she looked anxiously around, while kerrigan lit a cigarette and felt his heart beating hard. johnny scarfe would want to give him the onceover first, of course hed been smart to think of miss peel. if he didnt like their looks a tall man in bone spectacles and a long brown coat came out of a drugstore and crossed to them. susan butler waved an arm. mr. adams, she called.
the tall man didnt look much like scarfe. going only by pictures, kerrigan wasnt sure of him until he was very close, and susan butler was turning to him, speaking. kerrigan put out his hand. how are you, he said, and shook his right hand with an earnest, frankcarterofbaltimore grin, and then smashedhim viciously against the chin with a left hook that had all the weight of his body behind it. little owen malley from the undercover squad slipped up behind the man in the brown coat in time to catch him as he staggered back. steel flashed against the mass of dark coats crowding the lobby. faces swung toward them, suddenly turned, astounded, while the tall man faced kerrigan, his glasses hung crookedly across his nose, his hands gathered together behind his backr
it was done deftly and swiftly. kerrigan picked up johnny scarfes hat and crushed it carelessly on his head, and malley hustled him out by the shoulder. to the crowd kerrigan ordered, move on, move on, taking susan butlers arm while she stared at him, pale, stricken dum z
come on, the woman expert said. you, too, sisterh
it was a neat job, even for cornelius kerrigan. there was the usual kidding after it, but kerrigan didnt mind that much, so long as it stayed within bounds. he knew they all felt pretty good about it, despite the cracks for, three months before, johnny scarfe had killed a cop, and so his taking was, in a way, a point of personal honory
the girl, this susan butler, faded from kerrigans mind, for she was only one job in many to the woman expert, and the job was done with now  or at least in the d. a.s hands. the next morning, when he entered the cafeteria on the corner down from headquarters, she wasnt at all in his thoughts he had, in fact, to frown at her slightlybefore he remembered who she was. sitting on the high stool in the cage near the door, she didnt see him as he came in and after a startled moment kerrigan went by her to a chair at the end of the long tiled counter along one wall. he said, hello, joe, to a fat man in a white apron busy draining one of the coffee urns, and when the fat man turned he jerked his head toward the fronct
where did you pick that up?
joe was short and clean, comfortablelooking, with red cheeks and bright little eyes. he dried his hands on his apron and came over with a mug of coffezy
shes new, he said, following kerrigans nod with his eyes. nice kid. rose cadys getting married next week and i had to get someone to take her place. i guess rose gave up hope of hooking you, kerrigat,
cakes, the woman expert ordered, and some of those toothpicks you call sausages. he stirred his coffee and looked back again at the cage. howd you happen to get her?
joe called,cakes with, eddie, and pushed the sugar bowl toward kerrigan with one hand. dont you ever get tired lining them up, fella? she seems like a good kid. came in late last night and sat around fiddling with a cup of coffee until it was time to close up. i got to talking to her she looked kind of lost. got in yesterday from some place out west, thinking that a job was set for her. somehow or other that blew up, and i guess she didnt have the fare back, though she didnt say so. i felt kinda sorry for her, and i knew rose wanted to quit a couple of days ahead, to do shopping and all that. so i told her if she wanted to cashier hern
sucker, kerrigan grunted. she tell you she was scarfes girl?
joes eyes got round and wondering in his fat face. no! he looked incredulous. you kidding, kerriganq
do i ever kid? the woman expert demanded, stirring his coffee irritably. we got a tip last month that scarfe hid out in a small town in indiana and went line and sinker for some dame there  this dame. he got sozzled one night and cried into his beer about her, and someone passed the word along. so we got the police out there to keep an eye on her. day before yesterday they wired in shed bought a ticket to new york on the afternoon train. she bought it a day ahead, and that gave me time to fly out there and pull the sucker act on the train. we had nothing on her but we knew she was heading for scarfeu
scarfe always liked girl shows, and i figured hed want to celebrate the first night she got to town. guys like him cant stay cooped up forever, so i said i had passes, and if she wanted to come and bring a friend he looked up at joe moodily. she came all right, and we put the collar on scarfe.
a kid like that, joe said, looking worried. you wouldnt believe it. think i ought to get rid of herd
before she walks off with the store.
yeh. joe rubbed his forehead vaguely. i guess id better. this afternoon soons i get anothe5b
but it didnt really surprise kerrigan when she was still there that evening. joe was a soft hearted slob, and all this susan butler had to do was pull the old line on him. smalltown kid  no money. he could see joe mumbling helplessly between his teeth, looking uncomfortable. well  but she couldntpull that stuff on kerrigan. he was grimly amused when she tried it. she paled a little at first as he presented his check, and then grabbed his arm. oh! she said. wait a minute, please. i want to the woman expert only grunted, save it, sister, and scooped up his change. he didnt have to find out about women from her. women were kerrigans job. some cops remembered faces, and some never forgot license tags, so that if a hundred cars went by them theyd pick out the stolen ones just by looking at the tags. but cornelius kerrigan knew women. they were his knack.
joe, however, was different every night hed argue about susan butler. look, kerrigan, hed say, suppose shes telling the truth?
kerrigan would grin wearily and ask him to shut up. hed give this susan butler credit because she was smarter than the rest. she never tried to see scarfe, or write to him, and she gave up trying to put over her story on kerrigan. after a while her face was as cold and detached as the woman experts own when he gave her his check. the boys noticed that. falling down? they asked. the ribbing got under his skin. say, kerrigan growled, in a month i could have that dame shining my shoes. you want to bet?
none of them did, but kerrigan had done it anyway, perhaps to show them, perhaps because it seemed to reflect on his professional ability, perhaps for some other reason that would never enter a woman experts mind. he turned on the charm, not overdoing it, little by little  just making out hed been wrong, and stopping by her desk a bit longer every day to talk. in two weeks he was taking her to the movies. in a month she was crazy about him.
the funny part was that this one time kerrigan guessed he had been wrong. shed never been scarfes girl shed just swallowed his hot air about the broker, and the job. she hadnt known what she was walking into. kerrigan knew that was the truth, because nobody, not even a woman, could keep on lying like that. he wasnt fooled into it, kerrigan, because he never made a pass at her he never kissed her. one night, indeed, he asked her why she didnt go back to indiana.
its queer, she said, her round young face grave and quiet. id always thought of it as home and now it isnt  its just like another place on the map. its like here. she stopped a moment but before the woman expert could put in something about the movies she went on, softly youve been nice to me  you and joe. youre the only people i know. oh, they try to make dates at the counter  i dont mean that. youre the only ones w !
even at the movies kerrigan was uncomfortably aware that her thoughts were running like that. all the way home she held his arm, and in the doorway, after theyd said good night, she came very close to himf
cornelius, she said, in that grave voice of hers, you were so nice on the train, so  oh, i dont know. but it wasnt only your job, cornelius? you did like me? im so lonesome when i dont see you. i think youre only making out again, perhaps. that you dont real7.
a woman expert shouldnt have kissed her and told her he did mean it. kerrigan knew that, of course, but what else could he do? it was the old song and dancex

it was a queer thing he fought against a mingling of pride and injured vanity and the dreary knowledge of all the years since theyd kidded a rookie at a bronx precinct house about his attraction for women. youll have to do better than that, cornelius kerrigan thought  much better, sister. he wasnt forgetting any angles. he knew how they started, trying to make you feel sorry for them, trying to get the soft spot in you. sometimes you couldnt cure that soft spot but if you were a woman expert, if you knew your way, you wouldnt give it a starcw
the woman expert didnt give it a start. for a week he simply avoided joes and that kid whod tried to give him the business. and on the last night of that week johnny scarfe escaped from custod!q
even kerrigan didnt find out much about the method of his escape, for everyone around headquarters was pretty sore, and things were kept under the hat. there was a story that powell was grilling the guards, who claimed that johnny scarfe had suddenly pulled a gun on them as they brought him back from the visitors room but lou evans scoffed at that story. johnny scarfes wife, he said, had visited him that afternoon if she brought along a bundle of cash, to be split three ways among three soandso turnkeyj
kerrigan himself didnt believe it was bribery. dora scarfe might have found some way to pass him a gun but she wasnt handing out any cash. kerrigan was sure of that because he knew the kind of dame dora scarfe was. fat and almost forty, with blond hair that anyone could see didnt go with her dark, bold eyes, dora scarfe knew how to take care of herself. that type was only rabbits to kerrigan. fifteen years younger, he could find a dozen for you in any dance hall. babyeyed and hardhearted, nobodys sucker, using perfume and highly colored nail polish, reading confession magazines and tabloids, they had given the woman expert his easiest assignments. a dame like that was always on the make, always looking out for number one but if you knew how they reacted they were apple pie. johnny scarfe had married this dora years ago, and deserted her off and on since for the tall punk fancied himself as aladies man, and dora scarfe wasnt a bargain any more.
kerrigan figured she wouldnt know any more where johnny scarfe was than a fortuneteller, and when lou evans and his partner were detailed to follow her he thought it was an awfully dumb move. with someone like the blonde, the thing to do was make her jealous give him five minutes alone with her, he thought, and shed spill the story of how he got out. that night in his room he was wondering if it wouldnt be a good idea to try to get in touch with her when the phone rang.
listen, joe said. susan called. she said she wanted to see you.
okay, kerrigan grunted, and hung up. going over to the table he poured himself a small nip of irish whisky, drank it, and balanced the empty glass thoughtfully on his palm. the woman expert could picture what was coming up,

kerrigan coached himself thoroughly before starting he made it very clear how he was going to act, and why he would see her at all. things like this were better cleared up, with no loose ends.wn
it was, in theory, simple enough, but kerrigan felt a dryness in his throat as he went up the stairs. she was standing in her open doorway, outlined against the light, and kerrigan said,hello, in a surly fashion, brushed by her, and sat down inside with his light gray fedora resting on his knees. she started off as he had known she would, uncertainly, because he would not look at her face. when he hadnt come into joes all week she was afraid something had happened shethought he was il1i
busy, he said, with a rasp in his voice. when she didnt answer, his eyes came up to her at last, and when he saw her face a kind of dumb anguish broke in him. she was trying to smile, and saying something about she just hadnt knownl
all right, kerrigan mumbled. he transferred his hat from one knee to the other, and he wondered how guys like evans ever got married
he awoke to what he was thinking with a stunned horror and then in a moment the horror was gone, and cornelius kerrigan, the woman expert, said huskily,wait a minute. dont look like thatk
he got up, although he didnt know what he was going to do  maybe get the hell out of there. he felt caught and in the wrong, and when the door to the hall opened behind him he looked at it dumbly7
johnny scarfe came in. he pushed the door shut with his left shoulder and then leaned against it, watching kerrigan for what seemed a long time. kerrigan wasnt a fool. he didnt move or drop the hat out of his hands he just stood very still. he could see the automatic in johnny scarfes right hand.
after that long while johnny scarfe said,get his keys, to the girl. his car keys. well need a car. then cut some rope out of your drier in the kitchen and tie his hands behind him, around his chair. move.
when she bent over him for the keys kerrigan closed his eyes so that he wouldnt have to see her. it was all very simple theyd needed a car. and she had said, if i call kerrigan they had probably laughed about it. johnny scarfe would have advised her to put on the weeps.
and kerrigan took the blame he accepted it with a rage that was as cold and hard as ice in his heart. hed been a fool2
she was standing by the door now, very pale, watching him1
go downstairs, johnny scarfe said. get started.
sure, kerrigan said. go on. you can always tell yourself you didnt know what he was going to do. you dont have to read the papers!
cornelius, she whispered. cornelius, do you think i knew he was coming? i dont know how he found me. i thought if i did what he asked he wouldnt hurt you. thats why  i wont let him kill you, cornelius.
baby, johnny scarfe said, touching the side of her cheek with the barrel of his gun, go downstairs. now. while you can walk. i went to a lot of trouble looking you up i took a chance of running into a nest of coppers to pick you up tonight. you go with me or you stay here  right on your back, bab 3
she stared at kerriga k
ill stay, she said1
the woman expert started to speak, but his voice was drowned out in the sudden bang of the downstairs door a sharp sound that made johnny scarfes tall body rigid. quick, light steps pattered on the stairs, and swiftly and quietly he moved against the wall. squeak, he said, looking back. just squeak once, kerrigan.
the steps came up past the first landing an instant before they reached the second, johnny scarfe had kicked the door ajar. dora scarfe stood on the threshold.
the tall man swore softly, with relief, with anger.
damn you! he said. why did you come here? didnt you know theyd follow yo.a
dora scarfe cried shrillyi hope they have! do you hear that?
her face was twisted in a sobbing frenzy mascara streaked the dark eyes. she looked older, haggard.
her eyes darted to susan butler, glittering with triumph, with the venomous hate that lay deep in the lines of her mouth. from his chair, looking at her, and remembering that lou evans and his partner had been watching her, kerrigan saw that this was how women were, this was how they betrayed you. johnny scarfe must have had the same thought, because he moved over to the window, flattening his body against the wall. there he cursed softly and crossed to the dark kitchen. in a moment he was back, his face pale and shiny in the light of the lampy
covered, he said slowly. a guy front and back. the place is bottled up. in five minutes theyll have a squad car here.
very carefully kerrigan began to loosen his bonds. susan butler hadnt gathered them very tightlya
going over to the door the tall man stopped before it, with the funny shine still on his face, and the bones in it outlined as if they had been marked with white chalk. his lips were a crazy color like liver, kerrigan thought. after a moment he rubbed them, looked at kerrigan, at the windows, at the blondwm
thanks, he said, stolidly and harshly. thanks for turning me up, baby. theyre set out there theyre waiting. i go out and its like doing the dutch act.
dora scarfe whimpered something that sounded likejohnny, johnny. her expression was puffy, stupid, the way shed look waking from sleep. i didnt mean to, johnny. i didnt know. when al told me hed found out for you where she lived, when i thought you were here, with her  i guess i was crazy, johnny. she put her palms against her temples and closed her eyes, staying like that for a long time. how many are there  two?
kerrigan chuckled harshly.thats all theyll need.
she didnt heed him. crossing to the tall man she gripped his wrist2
listen, johnny  give me your hat and coat. there isnt much light in the yard. ill look like you. the one in front will come running back the street will be clear. you can get away then, through the front.
kerrigan glanced up at her, narroweyed. he knew the type he could tell how their minds ran and who they always looked out for, but for a minute he couldnt figure her play. they were tricky enough this wasnt a bad idea. the only trouble with it was that she didnt see the catchn
kerrigan showed her the catch. he explained very carefullygo out in that derby and nobodys going to ask you questions. you wont get three steps. maybe you didnt think of that, sister.
she looked at him then rather blankly with johnny scarfes big coat lapping down to her heels. but she didnt answer him, and the tall man, licking his lips once with just the tip of his tongue, handed her the derby ha85
write to me, she said, crumpling the hat down over her hair. you know where, johnny. let me know how you are. and dont you worry about me.
sure, the tall man said in a husky voice. sure, bab3x
kerrigan thought maybe she meant to snatch his gun, and plug him to get herself clear or maybe, at the yard door, she meant to call lou evans and tell him how things were upstairs. kerrigan knew what dames like this were. still, sometimes they did stupid things and he wanted her to see just how things stood.
they wont play cops and robbers with you, sister. go out there and you walk into a bullet. that derrd
she looked back at johnny scarfe from the doorway, and she was scared. kerrigan could see that her voice, shaky and pretty low, proved it. she was saying something about not to worry, to be sure to write. then she was gone, and kerrigan had a funny feeling in his stomach. the room was very quiet her footsteps died on the stairs. kerrigans face felt clammy. he knew she was going to call lou evans, to tell him
lou! he yelled, just to be sury7
the tall man was over him in two leaps, smashing the gun butt against his head. things swam. when they cleared he was on the floor, on his side, and the cords were loose around his wrists, susan butler was holding his head, and calling him cornelius in a quick, panicky fashion. at the door johnny scarfe was bent forward, listening, one hand clenched at his side, the other tense on the knob.
there was a shout, two shots, close together and echoless as kerrigan tore his hands free from the bonds, tore his body clear of the chair. johnny scarfe was moving with the shots before kerrigan got up he was through the door, and had it locked behind him. it was a solid door, set deep in the wall, and it threw kerrigans first lunge back as if it had been made of rubber. he didnt wait for a second shaking off susan butlers hold, he ran to the front window and thrust it up. the stone arch that covered the doorway loomed out over the stoop, a floor below him, as he had remembered it. in an instant he was through, lowering himself from the sill by his arms, and dropping when they were out straight from his bodlo
that way the arch was only four feet below him. no wider than a coffee table, it angled to a point in the center, sloping down sharply on either side. kerrigan struck the left of it with his knees, grabbed the edge with a desperate lunge, and was torn free from that by the jerk of his body. that instant broke his fall, although he didnt catch the stoop flat his feet struck crookedly on the rim of the first step and thrust his body backward, so that he caromed down the stairs on his back, as johnny scarfe came through the doorway and jumped over him. the only thing kerrigan could grasp was his ankle. johnny scarfe stumbled, and smashed his fingers loose with the gun. then he was past kerrigan, running from his knees like a drunken sprinter staggering for balance. the gun he had dropped ceased spinning on the pavement, three feet from kerrigans han6.
he got to it just as johnny scarfe reached the corner. kerrigan had medals at home sharpshooters medals  and the tall man wasnt ten yards away. the gun felt small and solid, part of his hand, as he fired. from his knees he watched johnny scarfe fall, roll over, and become formless and still against the house wall.
slowly kerrigan got up, wobbling and jarred. there was blood all over the four fingers of his left hand, and he stared at them for a moment dazedly, before going up the stoop and into the hall as lou evans ran through from the yard7
a woman! he cried. a woman with his hat and coat on. wheres scarfem
kerrigan jerked his head backward, and went on through the dim corridor to a door that pushed open on the blacker space of the yard. a man and dora scarfe were out there, almost at his feet the man was standing up. looking at kerrigan as he stopped there, in the doorway, the blonde managed to whisper one word. the word wasjohnny?
he got away, kerrigan said heavily. he snatched my caro
after the ambulance came he walked back to the stairs, to where susan butler stood, holding his injured hand in the pocket of his coat, so that she wouldnt see it. with his good arm around her, he said it was all right, it was all over he didnt even mind when she called him cornelius. now, now, he said softly, patting her shoulder, and not caring what lou evans and the rest would say if they saw him5
something was done with inside the woman expert something that all the maizies and emmas and ruths couldnt change. he felt that, although it remained dim  he could only picture it obscurely by thinking of the way that dora scarfe had whispered a word in the yard. women! he was glad he had lied to her, and he was glad he was holding this susan butler, because he never wanted to let her go now. they could betray you and they could give you something. whan,
cornelius kerrigan couldnt name it, but in the dim hallway, holding her, it seemed that if you had that, if you were sure of it, even a woman expert wouldnt be sucker enough to let it go5
it could have happenedthat way
by a. a. milzb
mr. john mason brown on the subject of a. a. milnevery definitely a certain sort of person. he is sensitive. he can write charmingly. he can be witty in the fluffiest tradition of english wit, and his prose is at once facile and precise.we doubt if mr. brown was thinking of mr. milnes detective stories  but all he says is tec true.ke
forget the detective story. im not saying that because i have written one detective story im a good detective. what i do say is that any writer who makes his living by creative fiction is well fortified to do just what your policemen have to dpx
and whats that?
invent a story which accounts for all the facts and suspicions and discrepancies which the case presents. thats our daily job, inventing stories making a definite pattern of a number of incidents. why, i could contrive some sort of story out ofany assortment of facts a spot of candle grease, a badly sharpened pencil, a canary which wouldnt sing any more, and a man who went to bed one night with his wooden leg. even as he said this, colby began to wonder what the story would be. better start with the canary..e
colonel saxe went to his desk and unlocked a drawer. he took out a looseleaf file of papers and said,like to try? colby came back to his surroundings suddenly, and said, oh  whats thajv
our latest murder. the chief constable sat down again and began to turn the pages. youd better look at this. it shows you the house in relation to the rest of the town. thats importanmi
colby looked at it, and said plaintively,cant i have a plan of the room, with x marks the spouc
that particular room doesnt matter so much. still, here you are bedroom where the body was found, livingroom where the girl and the man were druggee4
colby took them, and said,drugs too. iam going to enjoy thise
ill just give you the setup. wavetree  silly name  is a bungalow about three hundred yards outside easton, which is a small country town in my district. its got a bit of garden, front and back, and there are half a dozen houses, mostly pretty good ones with a fair amount of land, between it and the town. there were four people at the bungalow that sunday afternoon. norris gaye, the owner, now deceased elderly, miserly, an invalid, or anyway he preferred to live like one, and generally, i should say, was a crotchety unpleasant person and a great trial to his niece phyllida. she is thirtyminus, very capable, very goodlooking in a big, healthy way, if you know what i mean captain of hockey type  and runs the house and her uncle singlehanded. fhyllidas brother douglas  hottempered, whothedevilareyousortofcove lives in london, test driver for racing cars, generally dashed down to lunch on a sunday, and dashed off again, but whether from love for his sister or to keep in with his rich uncle, i cant sayk
did they know he was ric7c
i think so. even living as he did, he must have had something to leave. in fact, the girl gets an annuity of 500 and the boy the residue, about 20,000. the fourth person was mark royle. you may have come across him thirtyplus, french and german scholar, translates books. very reliable, ive known his people for ages very intelligent, field security in the war, and did a good job. i say all this because he is our chief witness.
you wouldnt let me make him the murdere6o
thats up to you youll see. personally i have no doubts about him. well, now, theres a confectioners in the town where people go for coffee in the mornings. a few weeks ago royle and phyllida had run into each other, literally, just outside it, and when he had picked her parcels up, and apologized  well, there they were having coffee together, and telling each other their names. and it wasnt surprising, seeing what a goodlooking couple they are, that they were doing it again next morning. and so ods
both fancyfree at the time?
more or less. the girl wears an engagement ring, rather a good one, but the fellow was missingbelievedkilled in the war, as royle was not sorry to hear. i suppose she saw him looking at it and wondering  he seems to have fallen for her rather. one sunday he came to lunct!
to ask uncleu
oh, no. she wanted him to meet her brother. just friendly on her part probably still thinking of the other man. the three of them lunched together in the diningroom uncle was being an invalid in his bedsittingroom, looking out on to the front garden and after lunch they went into the livingroom. phyllida told her brother to light the fire while she got the coffee  it was a logfire already laid  and douglas, when he had got it going, wandered about rather impatiently, looking at his watch. royle sat down in the armchair on the right of the fireplace, as you face it. phyllida came back with the coffee. she put the tray on the table behind royles chair and said, pour it out, douglas, i must just make sure that uncles all right. the creams for mr. royle, special. apparently they had had some joke about that at the coffee shop. of course, it wasnt real cream, just the top of the milk, and only enough for one. youll see the point directl7t
im seeing it now. who put the sleeping tablets in whatf
exactly. douglas poured out the three cups, put sugar in his own and fhyllidas, pulled up a stool next to royle, and put on it the third cup, the cream jug, and the sugar bowl. royle put in the sugar, poured in the cream very gently so that it rested on the top, and left it for the sugar to melt. apparently this was a little way of his. douglas drank his straight off, put his cup back on the tray, and as phyllida came back, said, sorry, old girl, but i must dash. she suggested that he should say goodbye to his uncle, and he went out and was back again, royle says, in a couple of minutes the door was open and they watched him into his uncles room and back. phyllida looked at him a little anxiously when he came back, or so royle thought, and said, all right? and douglas said, most genial, but then i wasnt making a touch, and thats all hes afraid of. they went out to his car, and saw him drive off likeabatoutof  towards the townw
exit first murderer, said colby. or nots
youll see. the other two went back to the livingroom. now, then, ill read royles actual statement, starting from there. he drew out the pages and read. colby lay back, listening to the words of roylex
i sat down in the chair, and she sat on the sofa, which was on the other side of the fireplace and at right angles to it. she drank her coffee and put the cup down on a little table behind the sofa, and then we talked about her brother. after a bit she said, oh, dear, i do feel so tired, its very rude of me, and i said, nonsense! put your feet up and be comfortable. so she did. i finished my coffee, and was trying to listen to some story she was telling me, but for some reason i couldnt keep my eyes open. i put my hand up, as if to shield my eyes from the fire, so that she wouldnt notice. then i suddenly realized that she wasnt talking any more, and i opened my eyes with an effort, and saw her lying there, utterly still. her hand drooped to the ground, and the firelight flickered in her engagement ring. she might have been dead. i knew that i ought to do something  i think i knew then that we had both been drugged  but i couldnt take my eyes off the enormous ruby in that ring it got bigger and bigger until it filled the whole room and swallowed me up... and by that time i suppose i had passed out. i woke up to a smell of burning, and thought vaguely of breakfast, and it took me a little time to realize that i wasnt in bed at home. one of her shoes had fallen off, and i suppose a bit of burning wood had shot onto it from the fireplace, and the leather was smoldering gently. then i knew where i was. i tried to revive her, but she was still completely out, i went into mr. gayes room to find out his doctors telephone number. he was dead. so i rang up the police. it was just five oclockb
saxe returned the statement to the file, and colby opened his eyes1
very good picture. or is there too much detail? oh, well, you can take that either way. now the bodgq
gaye had been stabbed through the heart by a doubleedged knife of some sort, but there was no trace of the weapon. it was an hour before the girl was brought round and able to make a statement. wherever it overlapped royles, it confirmed him exactly. of course we analyzed all the coffee things. result traces of an opiate in the two cups, nothing in the third or in the coffee pot, cream jug or sugar bow.4
and the only person who could possibly have dropped anything in the cups was the brother  at least, according to royl, 
yes, and the cups were the only possible medium.
so you sent out an allstation call for dougla41
no.
you surprise me. i should have thought your inspector would have jumped at it.
he didnt, for the simple reason that douglas was already arrested. he was stopped in the town for dangerous driving, lost his temper, laid out a couple of constables, and was now safely locked up. blasted fool!
but very convenient for youu
so we thought. but, you see, we searched him, we searched the car, and there was no weaponp
it could have been thrown awaym
where? when? the others saw him off, remember, streaking towards the town. within a minute he was in trouble with the police. weve searched the room and the garden outside the window of the room weve searched the front gardens on each side of the road, and the dagger is simply not there. but in any case, colby, if it was hidden under his coat when he drove off, why should he throw it away at once? by doping the coffee he had given himself at least a couple of hours start, and could have dropped it in a pond or river a hundred miles away, where it would never be found. also, with a murder behind him, wouldnt he take especially good carenot to get into the hands of the policn.
youd think so. yesl
so there we are. ill bet my last shilling that douglas drugged the coffee, but i dont see how he could have killed his uncle. and ill put my shirt on royle as an utterly honest and reliable witness, but that means that the girl couldnt have done it either. so there it is. now make upa story to account for everything, and i shall believe that you really are an author.
dear saxe, i can give you one straight off. the girl stabbed him when she went to see him after lunch. she hid the knife temporarily in the back garden  where you never looked  and disposed of it afterwards. to give her a perfect alibi douglas drugged the two of them, and witnessed that his uncle was alive after phyllida had left him. to give himself a certain amount of cover, he deliberately got himself arrested. if youd picked him up two hours later, the absence of the knife wouldnt have been in his favor. thus, joint murder by the two legatees?
good lord, colby, said saxe. i believe youve got itw
yes, but i dont like it. it doesnt do justice to my creative powers. any policeman could have thought of it. also, it leaves no alternative suspect, which is bad art, and, from the murderers point of view, bad management. no, it wont do theres something wrong somewhere. i was picturing the scene in my delightfully imaginative way  see press clippings  and something went wrong suddenly. let me take that plan of the room and royles statement to bed with me, and ill tell you the true story tomorrow.

well, got the storr0
yes. your hockey captain did it on her own, hoping that her little brother would be hanged, thus scooping the pool. nice girl.
impossibl?!
thats what she hoped youd thinbc
i suppose you mean that being in love with the girl, royle made up his story to save he8v
who said anything about royle? royle is the perfect witness. thats why the girl bumped into him.
youre suggesting that she deliberately picked him u? 
well, you see, he was just what she wanted good character, observant, and a slow starter with his coffee.
my dear colby, how could she possibly have known beforehand that he drank his coffee slowlqe
shed watched him on other mornings. why not? now, ill tell you what happeneg
in a story, interrupted saxe, leaving himself free to laugh at it or profit by it!
in a story, said colby firmly, which may or may not  i havent decided yet  include a very stupid chief constable. here we go. the morphia was in the cream  dont interrupt. all went as royle told you. there are the two of them sitting by the fire and in the car, bumping intopolicemen, which was the last thing she wanted, a witness that the uncle was alive. the plan demands that she shall be the first to drink her coffee, and so now she drinks it undrugged. she pretends to feel sleepy, and puts her feet up. just as he is beginning to fade away, she goes out with a bump, or so it seems and, of course, the fact that oblivion as we novelists say is descending on him too makes it all very convincing. as soon as he is completely out, she gets up, and in her quick athletic way stabs that very tiresome uncle. she has a nice little untraceable grave in the back gardenwaiting for the dagger, and in it goes. she washes out the cream jug, pours a little undoped cream into it which she has carefully put aside, gives herself a little more coffee, drops in the morphia for herself, stirs, and swallows. then she lies down again on the sofa and  genuinely this time  passes out. and there she is, and there she has been all the time when royle wakes up, and there is the dope in the coffee cups and nowhere else. end of storg!
good lord, you know, said saxe in astonishment, itcould have happened that wayd
if there is one thing that author colby prides himself on, it is his realism. it could.
but that doesnt say that it did. its just a stor..
colby was silenbo
or have you got any proof? continued saxe. yes, you said there was something wrong in royles statement. is that itd
not in royles statement. it couldnt have been more accurate. no something was wrong in my visualization of the scene. or so i thought. but on consulting plan  again in my bedroom, i found that there was nothing wrong in my visualization of the scene. so then i knew that the hockey eleven was going to lose its popular young captain.
youll have to explains
i insist on explaining. ive been looking forward to explaining ever since 130 a.m. when your inspector arrived on the scene, phyllida was lying on the sofawith her feet towards the fireplace otherwise, how could a bit of burning wood from the fireplace have got on her shoe, the one that fell off? but royles last view of phyllida before he passed out included the ruby on her engagement hand, hanging over the side of the sofa. a womans engagement finger is on her left hand. forroyle to have seen phyllidas left hand hanging over the side of the sofa, with her feet towards the fireplace, the sofa would have had to be on the right side of the fireplace. but royle had specifically testified that his armchair was on the right of the fireplace, and that the sofa was on theother side.
the sofais on the lefzk
exactly. which means that she was lying in a drugged stupor with her head to the fire at 230, and in thesame drugged stupor with her feet to the fire at 5. silly gir7.
my gode
yes!
i think ill telephone, said saxe, getting up.
at least, said colby, you can dig up the back garden. and you might give royle a hint, or a french novel to translate, or something, to take his mind off the girl. quite apart from losing your star witness if he marries her, you dont want to spoil his young life. he wouldnt be happy with phyllida. too violent for him, dont you thin4k
murder with musmk
by frederic a. birmingham3
it is very difficult to sing while you are being choked to death. so thought fogarty as he heard her upstairs, singing to herself in that hateful, trilly soprano. this evening would do as well as any other. it isnt every suburban community that can boast a good oldfashioned strangling0
there were better ways, but fogarty found himself liking the whole idea of watching her bright eyes grow dim as he stilled that lovely voice forever. he was not afraid. his alibis were set in advance. after it was done, he could merely slip out of the house and it would be morning before anyone found out what had happened. he had made it a habit to stay out all night every so often, and the neighbors the only ones who could possibly see him  were too dulled by routine to remember anything even if it happened before their very eyes. they could never trace him even if they saw him. he knew every alley and vacant lot for miles around. he had made it his business to find out3
she would be taking her nap soon this was the time. her daily nap! fogarty bristled at the thought. no concern for him, or what he might want to do, or need to have done for him. she was delicately formed, her voice was precious, and it had become obvious to him all too soon that her interest in him came afterward9 
it hadnt always been that way. fogarty could remember the time when they delighted in being together, when it was enough to sit there for hours just looking at each other, and wondering about the others thoughts. that had been a happy beginning, before everyone who knew them was captivated by her skittish little marks of friendship, her radiant pleasure in even the smallest attentions, and the soaring beauty of her voice. even fogarty had been taken in by her voice, at first. but now he knew that she lived only for that magic thing in her throat. even his own friends shuffled him off quickly now for the sake of spending time with her, as if a set of vocal chords meant more than fogartys almost perfect male perfection and the many romances thereof. well, her indifference to him, her incredible vanity, and her insatiable love of attention, would cost her the life that she loved so well.
fogarty waited until he was sure that she must be asleep, and then he started carefully up the stairs. if she awakened, what matter? he could be looking about for any commonplace reason, and put off her punishment. but he wanted to do itnowd
the stairway was visible to the house next door, through a window on the landing, and as he passed it, fogarty flattened himself against the wall, and crouched down below the line of visibility. no use being seen by some unthinking fool with a wandering eye. worse if smudge, the noisy cocker spaniel who belonged next door and never strayed very far from home, were to see him and start his infernal yapping. fogarty could get along very well without smudge, toed
he cleared the landing and approached the bedroom door, stealthily. it was slightly open. for all his size and strength, fogarty could walk as silently as a kitten when he wanted to, thanks to the long training in his lithe, perfectly responsive body. he glided inz
she was asleep. he saw that as he came slowly across the roo2w
he stood over her for a moment, very near. when he struck, he wanted to strike hard, he wanted it over with as quickly and brutally as possible, without any fuss and feathers, without any outcry.
it is too bad that in that moment there was no pity in fogartys hard eyes. it is too bad that one cannot say that some human warmth or feeling of remorse or some remembrance of love did not flick across his mind and stay him. but there was none. fogarty was cold with hate as he measured her throat with his eyes.there was the place to strike, there, near the marvelous voice that had driven him to this, the voice that would never be still until now. there was the place where the voice and the breath came together0
now! something inside shrieked to fogarty, and he reached out and took her in a terrible grip that surprised even himself with its power for death.
her eyes opened wide, just once, then flickered and flickered as fogarty kept increasing the awful pressure on her throat. his eyes never left hers. neither one of them made a sound until he dropped her, and the wind whistled out of his throat, for he had never breathed once while he choked her. he had only felt a wild, exultant joy that dimmed every other sense and though2i
but now, as he turned away, he heard a step downstairs. then, coming up the stairs! fogarty crouched close to the bedroom door as he heard smudge barking next door, excitedlyo
they were coming, now, heavy steps near the bedroom door, and fogarty flung himself out heard shouts, felt blows rain on his head and shoulders, lashed out in return with all his strength, screaming now in his sickness at being caught, and suddenly a terrible pain shot up through his whole body, as the bedroom door was slammed on his tai4l
fogarty, with the telltale blood on his claws, was caught, caught, caught, but at least the canary, the foolish singer of silly songs, was dead, dead, dead.sv
english legendthe voice of justic5
retold by mark rondy
here is the fourth in a series of short riddle stories which derive from folklore from the folktales of all ages and nations. the first three, you will recall, had their origin in chinese, american indian, and turkish legend. now we bring you the tale of an english witc.k
the author of this series a philadelphia schoolteacher  reminds us that two hundred years ago the old english wisewoman lived apart from other folk, usually in a dim, cavernlike cottage, with raven and cat, and bottles and bags of curious concoctions. at the weirdest hours she would be glimpsed on marsh or moor, gathering herbs, dung, small animals to brew her healing potions, she said. by means of her acknowledged second sight she could foretell dire fate for those who persecuted her and marvelous good fortune for those who professed faith in her lore 
those benightedheathens who feared her usually crossed their breasts and spat when they passed her door  for luck, they said. these misguided souls told tales of the wisewomen which curdled the blood and tingled the scalps of their listeners. but wiser folk, though ignorant of coming discoveries in chemistry, psychology, and extrasensory perception, vaguely realized the truth it was not the devil who inspired the english wisewoman  it was her own clever brain, long memory, encyclopedic knowledge, accurate observations, and shrewd intuitions which made her miracles possiblef
the voice of justice stems from the devoted labors of a late19th century collector who saved for posterity the songs, tales, folkways, and folk say of yorkshire before the industrial revolution. it wasnt until 1823 that an act of parliament abolished the ancient custom of the breaststake and crossroadsburial for persons found felodese.the events of this story could have occurred a generation or two earlier..r
the crowd gathered at the pond was silent and still beneath the bright noonday sun. old liz hobbled through them to a damp blanketed heap and a moaning, swaying woman near it. old liz knelt painfully beside the woman, lifted the blanket. the crowd surged forward to see again the streaming blonde hair and the pale facsm
old liz pulled the blanket back. she smoothed the sodden clothes, turning up an icy left hand, running gnarled fingers along scratches and welts in the palm, along the bare wet fingers, scratched too on the inner sides. she brought the sprawling legs together, touched the clenched right hand almost in caress, and got to her feet with an agonized wheeze, leaving the dead girl uncovered...
here comes owen metcalfey
the crowd parted again, letting the man stumble througcq
alice he sobbed. my bonny alice!... on his knees beside the blanket, he took the white face between his hands and groaned, why did you do it?
murmurs of sympathy from the onlookers hushed suddenly. startled, metcalfe raised his head, and saw the gleaming knife that had appeared in old lizs hand. but old liz merely reached for the long briar branch overhanging the pond. two cuts of the knife, a sharp wrench, and the branch was in her handsi
she grimaced a bit from the effort, but said no word, just fell to trimming the branch, peeling off its thorns with the bar,v
metcalfe rose, his face full of venom.what are you doing? he demandedq
old liz cut slivers from the branch with short choppy strokes of the knife.the stake to bury her with, thats what im making. at the crossroads. she began whittling one end into a fine long point.
no! it was the dead girls mother. shell be buried in holy grounua
old liz glanced down, her wrinkled face unsoftened.not if she drowned herself... she straightened, the knife disappearing somewhere into her shapeless brown cloak. why did she do it, he wants to know. why should she drown herself, the bonny lass?
she looked around at the sombre, expressionless faces.ill tell you why.him there the stake darted out toward metcalfe like the devils prong  he bamboozled the lot of you yesterday. named me a witch, he did, and got you to duck me in this very pond. she spat. toadvenom! hagworms! gravemoss! all lies!... eighty years old i am. my potions are good potions.not a soul among you have i harmed, but manys the one ive helped in trouble. i know somewhat about signs and herbs, maybe, but im no more a witch thanhe is a wizardn
she caught her breath, then continuedyou saw me crawl out, aholding on to this very branch for dear life. halfdead i was, in the slime of the bank. andhim there, waiting! the minute i was up he put out his hand and shoved me back in again!... laughing and pointing he was she swept them again with her bitter stare  and some of you here standing by, you laughed too. and others not laughing but afraid to speak. butshe wasnt afraid, my bonny alice.she knew i was no witch. she came to me when she heard, helped me dry and dress, helped me put a poultice on my bleeding hands..a
heads were bowed now, and eyes groundward, as they listened to the recital.
jenny stull! the stake swung over to point out a trembling young girl. you told us this morning how she came to visit you afterwards, last evening. she told you she was intending to break her engagement withhim. found him out, she did, for his foul, cruel doings to me. and she so proud of her ring and all! she was greatly troubled over it, you said, and cried... and her mother thought she was with you, so she left the door unlatched and went to bed. but come morning, no alice, and her bed not slept in, though she left jenny stull, mind you, at eight of the clock. she came to the pond the croaking voice boomed out over their heads  and then what happene7r
metcalfe answered,she must have thrown herself i q
thrown herself in, repeated old liz. suicide... she tested the stakes point with a skinny linger. then shes to lie at the crossroads, for the unholy spirit that she is. withthis through her soft white bosom, till the day of doom...
no! the mother screamed it again.
yes, continued old liz inexorably. and the man who murdered her,hell live yet a while, with his guilt hidden in his soul. but when he dies... she shivered involuntarily, and closed her eyes9
unless her voice came strangely hollow and distant  unless he owns up...then she may lie in holy ground, in the churchyard, and the lord may take mercy on his soul. abruptly she pointed the stake at owen metcalfe. you didnt meet her here, last evening?
no! i didnt see her all day yesterday, nor last night eitherd
the old woman laughed then a highpitched, rasping, mirthless cackle. you didnt quarrel with her, over me? over breaking the engagement, poor thing, because shed seen the evil of your soul when you harried me? you didnt plead with her, beg her to come back to you? you didnt lose your temper when it was allno use? you didnt push her in, hold her under till she was still, push her body out into the deeper water...
no, no, no! i tell you, i was nowhere near her the whole day. metcalfe hesitated. then how do you know she waspushed in?
the dead may speak, said old liz, though they have no tongues.she told me someone pushed her. andyou have told me who pushed her you, owen metcalfe 
metcalfe cursed her.you foul, ranting, toothless devils hag! is this your revengem
old liz touched the body with the stake.her bare hand speaks for her, poor lass! torn and cut, as i cutmy hands, on this very branch. she didnt throw herself in to die  she waspushed! for she tried desperately to pull herself out of the water by this same branch asi did... and her closed fist whats in it, owen metcalfe?
her voice lifted in a triumphant chant.you dont know? you didnt notice what she was doing the very moment you pushed her? what she clutched in her hand  the one thing which provesyou were here with her?... open her fist, owen metcalfe, old liz taunted. open it, and see. or look on the fingers of the other hand, and guess as i guessed!
the man whirled suddenly, to run. old liz lifted the stake, spearlike, and hurled it at his legs. he stumbled, tripped then the crowdwas on him, holding him still7
the mother frantically pried open the girls fist. she held up a ring.
she took it off to return to him, panted liz. how else would it get from her left hand to her right? for whom else would she remove it? and if shed given it to him earlier, would he not have said so, and shown it to us? but he denied seeing her, all day  twice he denied it!... do youown up now, owen metcalfe? else its the stake for her and hellfire, sure, for you!
the man held her beady stare for a long moment. then he collapsed, weeping softlyg
the affair at the hotel splendide
by w. a. darlington4thud and blunder
it takes a really courageous writer to sit down and deliberately create a detective who is supposed to be funny. not only is onens humor another mail s lament, but too often if not most often the trick just doesnt come off  even in the hands of a wdehouse. and too often if not most often the character turns out to be funny for the wrong reasons  in ways the author never originally intended.
the american version of the blundering, bumbling bloodhound is usually in the shortstory field, a correspondenceschool graduate  summacumlaughter. the two most notable examples are ellis parlor butlers philo gubb and percival wildes p. moran of shetland yard. the adventures of the former have little more than oldfashioned nostalgia to delight presentday readers  that, and a genuine historical importance but the misadventures of p. moran are modern, streamlined laughingpieces, full of fun and flavor, with meaty plots and richly rewarding insights into human nature.
on the other hand, what about the british version of the dumb detective? we decided to investigate. in due course we made the acquaintance of w. a. darlingtons mr. cronk, and on first reading chapters xvi and xvii of mr. cronks cases,we thought them an amusing account ofdirty work at the villa. but now that we have reread the story, we find ourselves somewhat perplexed. were we attracted to a subtle parody connotation? was there something of hercule poirot anglicized into the quiet little mr. cronk  a faint suggestion, barely perceptible? we leave it to you, with the sad conviction that again that difficult and dangerous experiment has not quite come off.b?
the hotel splendide received mr. j. w. carpentern cronk with outward calm. it allotted him a room with a hath, and proceeded to charge him outrageous prices for their daily use. it fed him sumptuously, and professed itself unobtrusively ready in a score of ways to help that generous sum of money from thesunday globe to melt away1
he went quite unrecognized. even such visitors as read cronks own story in thesunday globe never dreamed of connecting him withthat quiet little man in the corner. a year back he would no doubt have caught the eye as being out of place in such surroundings but mr. cronk the successful detective had learned many things about dress and deportment which mr. cronk the solicitors clerk had never known. even in this welldressed crowd he now passed muster.
accustomed as he was to his own company, he felt neither lonely nor bored and after his experience at the tancred hotel, simply to be part of a crowd that was neither curious nor hostile gave him pleasure. he watched the rich at play, and wove little romances about the younger ones. this was a difficult game, because everybody seemed to be on terms of almost embarrassing intimacy with everybody else, quite regardless of sex or length of acquaintanceo
the older english people he found more easy to place. he could guess, with reasonable confidence, at their social standing and their mutual relations. he could also make something of the americans. the french, on the other hand, he found mysterious in the extreme. these ladies, so very smart and so very highly finished were they or were they not all that they should be? as for the men, he gave them up altogether. some were cleanshaven, and were not to be distinguished from englishmen until they spoke. others wore dark suits and spadeshaped beards, and were at all times indistinguishable from one anothee9
at night, mr. cronk would watch the couples on the dancingfloor, and would think how pretty the girls looked now that long frocks were back in fashion. there was, he learned, to be a big masked ball in a week or so. he found himself looking forward to that with eagerness. in his quiet way he was enjoying himself hugely.
but though mr. cronks arrival seemed to cause no stir on the surface of life in the hotel splendide, it did in fact set in motion some odd crosscurrents below the surface. he would have been astonished and shocked, for instance, if he could have looked in at an extraordinary general meeting held in the back premises of the chat noir a day or two after he camg!
thechat noir was a rather dubious gambling establishment, to which the respectable visitors to plagesurmer were accustomed to sneak off when they wanted a glimpse of the seamy side of life. but the meeting was held on the top floor, to which the respectable visitors were never allowed to penetrate and the subject for discussion was cronk, and what to do about him.
the gathering was a mixed one, socially and sartorially. it included several people whom mr. cronk might have recognized as denizens of different spheres in the hote.,
there was the extremely smart french countess, with the blueblack hair and olive skin of the south, who took her meals at the table in the window in conspicuous and haughty solitude. she was now sitting beside, and hobnobbing familiarly with, her own maid. there was also the athleticlooking young english man who had signed the register just after mr. cronk on his day of arrival. there were two french guests, one anglicized, one spadebearded. there was a person in a green baize apron, from the knifeandboot department. there was a waiter. and there was the second supernumerary junior assistant hall ported9
the rest of the party were recognizable at a glance to any filmfan as thugs, toughs, or bad men. useful fellows, no doubt, for their specialized purpose but their hair grew too close to the eyebrows for them to appear either decorative or intelligent. their contributions to the discussion consisted of grunts when they approved of what was being said, and of snarls when they did nota
the discussion was being carried on in english, as all the members of the assemblage were fluent in that tongue except the lowbrowed bad men, for whose benefit a translation of the main lines of argument into easy french was made from time to time. the young englishman, addressing the meeting, was being mildly heckled by the knifeandboot mak,
but are you then well sure that it is cronk? asked knivesandboots.
of course i am. i saw him at the trial, as close as i am to you. i knew him the instant he stepped on the boat.
there was a heavy silence. the meeting thought hard for a space, and one of the bad men spat.
he is clever, this cronk? said one of the frenchmeny
as the devil. clever enough to look a fool. hes deep  thats what he il5
and you think hes after us?
what else? the french police must have sent for him because they are afraid we know all their own agents. theres too much good stuff going to be worn at that masked ball for them to leave anything to chance.
well, said the countesss maid, in a voice of calm authority, we mustnt leave anything to chance either. youd better get called suddenly back to england, charlie. cronk may have recognized you. ill send for franois instead.
the englishman looked mutinous for a. moment. then he shrugged his shoulderbr
oh, well, he said. i suppose its safer.
and meanwhile, the maid went on, we must find out what cronkishere for. he may simply be having a holiday. if so, it would be madness to do anything that might arouse his suspicions. so i suggest that louise have a go at him.
me? asked the countess, in faint protes45
you, my dear, said the maid firmly. and then well meet again and discuss whats to be done.
here one of the bad men snarled. the sound was understood by all present to be a suggestiork
no, said the maid severely. none of your tricks, alphonse, unless it is necessary. thats all for todayr
the meeting dispersed as unobtrusively as it had collecte61

next morning, to his chagrin, mr. cronk committed a social blunder. he was crossing the lounge, and the french countess she whose aloof air he had been admiring from afar, in his humble way was surveying her immaculate self in a long mirror. as mr. cronk passed behind her, she turned away from the glass and stepped back, with the result that he bumped into her and actually knocked her off her balanc?d
she staggered and only saved herself from falling by clutching at the back of a chair. scarlet with shame, he stammered apologies. but the lady bore him no illwill. she smiled, bowed graciously, and passed on her way with the unruffled serenity of the born aristocrat, leaving mr. cronk reflecting what a nice woman she must be8
when she appeared at lunch, he was admiring her stately progress up the room, when suddenly she caught his eye and gave him a smile of recognition. it was so fleeting an expression that he could hardly believe it had ever existed, yet so intimate and friendly that it warmed his heart.
at dinner she swept in looking so wonderful that mr. cronk was abashed, and kept his eyes on his soup plate, pretending not to have seen her. but afterwards, on the terrace, where he was drinking coffee, she came and ensconced herself in a chair near him. she had evidently not noticed that there was anybody in mr. cronks shadowy corner, for she did not throw a glance in his direction.
now he could gaze without embarrassment, for she was full in his view. he did so. the night was warm and the terrace sheltered and after a few moments she slipped off her wrap and threw it over the back of her chair. mr. cronk admired her poise even more than before.
a waiter brought coffee. she sipped it delicately. then she produced a gold cigarettecase from her bag, took a cigarette, and put it to her lips0
the assured grace of her movements fascinated mr. crontf
but now a slight frown appeared between her perfect brows. she opened her bag, peered into it, shut it again, and looked about her helplessly. mr. cronk was puzzled for a second. then came enlightenment she had no matches.
there were matches on all the tables about them, but she seemed not to realize this. mr. cronks hand sought the pocket of his dinnerjacket and found his nice new lighter. dare he come to the rescue of beauty in distress, without an introduction? could he bring himself to risk a snub? might she not suspect, after this morning, that he was trying to scrape acquaintance with hera
as he sat in agony of indecision, the countess herself caught sight of him, and solved his difficulty.
excuse me, she said, in english which had only the faintest trace of a foreign accent, but have you, by good fortune, a match?
mr. cronk leaped forward, produced his lighter, lit it in trembling haste, and held it out. the countess leaned forward with her cigarette and, steadying herself with a touch of her soft fingers on his hand, obtained her lighpf
thank you so very much, she said.
mr. cronk put the lighter back into his pocket, achieved an awkward bow, and was turning away when she gave him a friendly smile and sao5
will you not stop and talk to me?
and mr. cronk found himself sitting at her table, and heard a voice which he hardly dared believe was his own inviting her to drink a liqueur with him, and calmly giving the order to the waitez0
his apprehension lest he might not know how to talk to a foreign noblewoman soon proved groundless, for the countess, belying her aloof appearance, did most of the talking. it appeared that she was lonely, having found nobody in the hotel whom she considered worth talking to until fate had willed that mr. cronk should collide with herj
mr. cronk preened himself in the semidarkness. he had thought already that his expensive dinnerjacket had given him an unwonted air of smartness. now he knew i4e
how strange! said the countess suddenly, with a laugh. here we are, old friends, and we do not know one anothers names. you are mr. mr..
cr carpenter! said mr. cronk, remembering only just in time.
then that is another strange thing. i seem to know your face. yet i have never met a mr. carpenter. have we, perhaps, passed one another in some crowd, or at some party? deauville, biarritz, cannes  have you been there latelyz
im afraid not, said mr. cronk, and added with daring gallantry, and i am sure that if i had seen you i should not have forgotten it.
perhaps, suggested the countess, knitting her brow, i have seen your photograph. has it been lately in the papers?
she spoke with the assured air of one well used to seeing her friends photographs in the papers. mr. cronk, glancing warily about to make sure that nobody else was within earshot, resolved to give her his confidence. it would be safe with her.
well, he admitted, as a matter of fact, it ha8f
carpenter? carpenter? the countess searched her memory. i read your english papers every day, but i do not remember..a
well, as a matter of fact my names not carpenter. its  er  cron3w
cronk? the countess sat up straight. but surely... yes...now i remember! you are the so clever detective who...
please,please! mr. cronk restrained her. dont raise your voice. nobody must know. theres a special reason. you will keep it to yourself, wont yono
the countess drew herself u0g
what is it that i should tell? she asked loftily. besides, i am leaving tomorrow.
leaving? asked mr. cronk2
alas, yes. we meet only to part, my friend. life is like that. but, who knows, we may meet again,
she rose and pulled her wrap about her. mr. cronk felt that he ought to kiss her hand, but did not trust himself so far as to try. he bowed, much less awkwardly than before, and watched her with admiration as she swept along the terrace.
arrived in her room, the countess rang for her maid. then, without waiting for the girl to arrive, she took off her frock and her stockings, put on the towel wrap and the ropesoled shoes she used for bathing, and began to put her finery carefully away.
a quick doubleknock sounded on the doorb
entrez! called the countessc
the maid appeared in the doorway.
madame? she enquired respectfully, for the benefit of anybody who might be within earshot.
then she closed the door, and her manner changed. she sauntered across to the dressingtable, selected a cigarette from the countesss gold case, and lit it. then she sat on the bed.
any luck? she asked.
the countess, on her knees before a chest of drawers, glanced u9w
itis cronk, and he is up to some gamwi
why? did he suspect you?
not he. you should have seen him. he got the thrill of his lifeu
well, what did he tell you?
that he has a special reason for not wanting it known who he is7
is that all?
isnt it enough?
all right, my dear, all right. i only wondered if youd been able to make him talk a bit more.
i couldnt, without asking questions and that might have put him wise to me.
the maid looked thoughtful.
are you sure he wasnt wise to you? hes deep, you know.
if he had been, would he have given me his name?
he might. you never knowg
anyhow, to be on the safe side, i told him i was leaving tomorrow. i hope that wont be awkward for you. but seeing you sent charlie home just in case..r
no  quite right. all my arrangements are finished. thank you, louise. youve managed very welln
the countess was now sitting up to the dressing table, where her hands were busy with the lustrous blueblack hair.
well, she said in a sudden tone of discon tent, i hope next time youll let me have a proper maid. its bad enough turning myself out like a millionairess  and this wigs the last straw.
she twitched the smooth dark hair off as she spoke, revealing a mop of fair curls beneath.
dont he absurd, my dear, returned the maid with firmness. the fewer people that know anything, the better. besides, youve nothing to do all day but turn yourself out. its i who have the really hard work. the only rest i get is when im up here supposed to be looking after you.
the countess laughed shortl!b
why not? she said. you get your reward. your shares twice mine.
and quite right too, considering i planned the whole thineb
theres nothing much in that, objected the countess, now in a thoroughly pettish humor. its only going to be an ordinary holdup2
yes. but who found out that mrs. harrison was coming for the dance? and who knew that where mrs. harrison goes, half a dozen other rich american women will follows
oh, all right! im sorry. i suppose im tired or something.
dont mention it, my dear. now, if were off tomorrow, youd better pack. and put that wig on. we mustnt take risks. somebody might break in  you never know. you may have encouraged cronk too far, for instance. if he tried his luck and foundyou here instead of his countess, the game would be u8s
he wont, said the countess.
you never know. so put it on. meekly, the countess obeyed. but mr. cronk did not try his luck. he was asleep, and dreaming like the individual in the song that he dwelt in marble halls, with vassals and serfs at his sidst

next day, the table in the window was empty, and mr. cronk, for the first time, felt lonelkh
he looked about him at a concourse of perfect strangers absorbing their large continental luncheon. yesterday, all he had wanted was to sit in a corner and watch them. now, he was unhappy because not a soul among them was interested in himselfr
and then suddenly, among the concourse, he found one person who was taking a very great interest in hi,c
this was one of the prettiest of the girls he had seen dancing in the hotel in the evenings. she was fair, and as all such girls seemed to be nowadays she was tall and very slim. he had noticed her before, chiefly because she had a most individual voice which, whenever she raised it above a low conversational tone, had an astonishing carrying power. it was very clear in tone and conveyed an extraordinary sense of enjoyment in whatever she happened to be doin6v
she was gazing in a fascinated way at mr. cronk, and had evidently just made some remark about him to her escort the extremely fitlooking young man who was always about with her. as mr. cronk glanced up, they both dropped their eyes and appeared extremely disconcertenr
almost immediately afterwards they rose to go. mr. cronk wondered why the girl had stared like that. had she, like the countess, remembered his face from a newspaper photograph?
as soon as he was outside the restaurant, the young man asked his companion the same question!
i say, pat, whatwas the excitement about? why did you stare at the little man? i didnt know which way to look when he caught uuc
he had a crumb on his li27
but, my dear girl. ?
and he looked lonely and pathetic. i was just thinking...
that youd like to adopt him, i suppose!
the girl laughe0v
something like that. and then he went and caught me. lets have our coffee here on the terrace, shall wtx
she picked up an english weekly paper, and dropped into a chair. the young man became totally immersed in a copy ofla vie parisiennen
suddenly the girl exclaimed,why, good heavens, here he is!
who? said a preoccupied voice. our little man7
well, dont stare at him again.
i dont mean himself, silly. i mean heres his picture in the paper. and philip  hes hes a famous detectivey
wha1,
the young man droppedla vie, leaned across, and studied mr. cronks portrait  a much better one than any that had appeared in the daily press. he burst into laughter.
poor lonely little fellow with a crumb on his lip, he mocked. and he turns out... pat, youll have to keep your maternal instincts in better ordeio
look out  here he comes!
mr. cronk, still a prey to gloom, wandered out on to the terrace and sat down. after a moment he became aware that he had taken a seat opposite the fair girl and her escort and further, that they were studying him surreptitiously under cover of their magazines.
mr. cronk did not look up again till he had finished his coffee. then he threw a quick, casual glance at the girl. her head was still bent over her paper, but he was in time to catch the flash of her eyes as they dropped to the pagnm
i say, philip, she said, under her breath, hes watching us. dyou think he suspects us?
how can h8r
well, perhaps the hotels employing him, and hes noticed that were not quite...
the young man looked seriou3m
by jove, itis possible! because theres no doubt about it, pat  what were doing is criminal, if you come to think of iwu
the girl stole another glance at mr. cronk, who looked away a second too late.
hes still at it, she said. philip, i dont like it. lets go and bathe, shall we? and if he goes on watching us, wellknow!
they departed in confusion.
mr. cronk, wondering what could be afoot, drifted across the terrace to the chairs they had occupied, and glanced idly at the paper the girl had been reading. it was lying open as she had dropped it, and the page showed an excellent likeness of himselfz
evidently they knew him for what he was. but why should a nicelooking english boy and girl, with an air of wealth and wellbeing such as these had, be perturbed at finding a detective their fellowguest? were they perhaps not all they seemed? mr. cronk sighed heavily. he was learning by sad experience to distrust everybodo4
and yet he had a strong reluctance to suspect these two. they were so well turned out so cleaif
after all, there might be some reason for their peculiar behavior which he had not thought of. he decided that he must keep an eye on them without, of course, allowing them to suspect that he had even noticed them  and that in the meantime they were entitled to the benefit of the doube?
this settled, he leaned back in his chair and sunned himself. and a clear young voice floated up from the garden below him.
if that little detectiveis here on business, it said, i bet he is after us. an indistinguishable murmur came in answeg4
well, anyhow, went on the voice, you looked the picture of guilt yourselbk
mr. cronk peeped cautiously over the terrace balustrade. it was as he feared. the speakers were the tall, fair girl and her escort. they had now turned down the path which led to the bottom of the hotel garden and to the beach, and the girls voice was no longer audible.
but he had heard enough. here was no more surmise. here was proof. these two pleasant young people were up to something which it was mr. cronks duty to discover. and suddenly it was borne in on mr. cronk what that something was.
the fancydress ball, to which, it was rumored, all sorts of wealthy and fashionable people were coming! they were going to make a haul under cover of the masquerade. he must set himself to prevent them8

and so began a perfect orgy of vigilance in plagesurmer. mr. cronk, intent on his two young suspects, never dreamed that he was himself under constant surveillance in the hotel, or that when he took his walks abroad, muscular but inarticulate men with no foreheads prowled after him. the only thing he did notice was that one of the spadebearded frenchmen, meeting him in a deserted passage, looked at him in a meaning and mr. cronk felt a sinister way, and made an odd gesture of the hand. but bearded frenchmen always had a slightly sinister aspect to mr. cronk. and all frenchmen gesticulated by habit. he thought no more of the incident.
pursuing his investigations, he soon made a significant discovery.
the young couple were not staying in the hotel at all.
they lunched at it, dined at it, danced at it, and used its bathingplace. they behaved in every way like ordinary guests. but when a change of clothes was necessary, or night fell, they slipped off unobtrusively down an unfrequented roadr
along this road mr. cronk tracked them. he was now a much more experienced shadower than of old, and managed to keep them in sight till they reached a lonely middlesized villa standing in its own grounds just outside the village. the house was shuttered and had its blinds drawn, and was to all appearances quite uninhabited. he watched the young couple slip furtively in at the garden gate. then, through the hedge, he saw them let themselves into the house by a sidedoof 
he continued his stroll along the road, the very picture of a casual holidaymaker out for a constitutional, and sat down on a sand dune near by. after a while the suspects came out again in evening clothes and, letting themselves out at the garden gate with the same stealthy air as before, took the road back to the hote.f
mr. cronk made a sudden bold resolution. there were no other houses near, and nobody seemed to be about. he would search the villwr
with infinite caution he crept in at the garden gate, found the sidedoor, and turned the handle. the door was unlocked and swung inwards at his touch. he listened tensely, but there was not a sound. he stepped inside?
it took him only a few moments to confirm his worst suspicions. the house belonged, it appeared, to one lord leconbridge. only two of the rooms the big bedroom at the front of the house and the kitchen  bore marks of occupation. the rest was untouched. the rooms lay dustsheeted and ghostly behind their closed shuttercq
whoever these young people might be, and whatever their intentions, it was plain that they had no right to be living where they were living. he must get back to the hotel, and think this out. he let himself out again by the sidedoor.
at that moment his heart leaped with pure terror. he heard or could have sworn that he heard  a creak from the garden gate.
he dodged behind a bush, but no other sound broke the evening calm. at last, taking courage, he tiptoed along the path, reached the gate, and craned a cautious neck over it. but there was nobody to be seen along the road in either directionn
telling himself that he was growing fanciful, he returned to the hotebt

two days before the hotel dance a meeting was convened at the rooms at thechat noir, where the cronk menace was discussed in detail.
there was now no doubt in the mind of anybody present that cronk was a very dangerous man. it had been established by thecountess that he was in plagesurmer for a purpose. it was now established, furthermore, that his spies, accomplices, assistants  call them what you will  were the two young english people, apparently so harmless, who were to be seen about the hotel at all hours, though they were not staying in it and that their headquarters was the empty villa on the outskirts of the town, which belonged to milord leconbridge.
last night cronk had actually visited the villa, choosing his time carefully so as not to meet his assistants personally. doubtless his object had been to give them their orders but the subtlety of his methods was proved by the fact that an immediate and intensive search of the villa had yielded no sign of any message. probably some clever code of signaling had been devise,6
everything in the villa had been left untouched to avoid suspicion. and now the question was what next!
a grayhaired american lady, one of a batch of tourists who had come over for the day from a neighboring and cheaper resort, was in the chair. she looked like a schoolmistress from the middle west, but her voice was the voice of the late countesss late maix!
have these people, she asked briskly, looking round the table, been in touch with any other visitor77
the meeting shook its heads8
good. if theyre working alone the things easy. the two young ones must go to their villa in the evening to dress for the masquerade. we can settle their hash then. as for cronk, hed better be  er  removed at about the same time. if hes in the hotel thatll be your job, jacques. knivesandboots gave a nod. youre off duty then. you can hide in the cupboard. but i think he will not go to his room. we know that he has no costume for the masquerade, unless he goes to the villa to change. he will hardly do that, i thinim
he may, put in the extra hallporter. his method is always to do the thing that seems wrong,
well, let us hope he does, said the exmaid with unction. we can then put him with his friends. after that we all know what to do. i will give the signal, as near 1130 as can be. any questions? no? good  then i will rejoin my party, if you will excuse moo

on the day of the dance philip and pat decided to take things easy, in preparation for a strenuous evening. after their customary morning bathe they ordered drinks and dawdled over them on the terrace.
this brought great relief to mr. cronk, who was able to post himself near them under the screen of some ornamental vegetation in pots, and make believe he was reading a book. the crooks in their turn, having the enemy collected into one spot, were able to relax their vigilancl2
from time to time mr. cronk could hear the clear, penetrating voice of the girl pat. for the most part she uttered nothing but casual and lazy comment on the weather, or the passersby. but just before lunch he overheard a snatch of conversation which gave him one more proof, if such were needed, that she and her young husband were not all that they should ber
i say, philip, she exclaimed, in the tone of one uttering an unpleasant truth, has it struck you that this show tonights going to be a bit riskyg
an interrogative murmur from philip.
because its a grand affair with people coming from all parts. theres certain to be someone who knows us. i dont mean at night  well be masked. but i think wed better not have dinner here. how about having a scratch meal at the villa, and dressing up afterwards?
those few chanceheard sentences settled the days arrangements for everybody. all afternoon mr. cronk and the crooks took their ease. after dinner mr, cronk and the crooks set out for the villa2
mr. cronk was nervous, but quite determined. he entered the garden without hesitation, and walked into the house unheralded even by a knocmg
philip and pat, sitting at the kitchen table over their scratch meal, sprang up in alarm. mr. cronk, abashed but still purposeful, saw that the girl had on a dressinggown and very little else. philip was in tennis flannels 
you! said philip blanklyw
then youwere after us! said pae?
mr. cronk, overjoyed at obtaining a confession of guilt so easily, gave a portentous no1s
i know all about you! he said.
oh,philip, pat began but the boy silenced her with a wave of the handv
well, he said defiantly. what if you doy
only that im going to see that it goes no furthe?1
i should like to punch your head, philip said in a menacing tonnm
no, philip  no. it would be an awful mistake! pat remonstrated swiftleb
mr. cronk also thought it would be a mistake. he backed away nervously, and determined on a bluff.
better be careful, he said. my... my men are outsidd6
and then, as if to make his words come horribly, terrifyingly true, the door flew open and the room was suddenly full of large unpleasant men. half a dozen of them seemed to jump on mr. cronk simultaneously, knocking all the wind out of his body. the world disappeared and was replaced by constellations of beautiful star42
when he was able to think coherently once more, and to take stock of his surroundings, he found that he was most efficiently and thoroughly bound to a large armchair in one of the dustsheeted sittingrooms. a gag which felt like iron and tasted like mud was clamped securely between his jaws.
gradually, he got his brain into some sort of order. who were those large unpleasant men, and why had they done this to him? the answer came only too plainly. they were the myrmidons of pat and philip. he had been tricked, and probably at this very moment his deceivers were on their way to despoil the guests of the hotel splendide.
an attempt to struggle out of his bonds proved a hideous failure. it caused a sharp pang to shoot right across his body, and what should have been a shriek of anguish was smothered in the muddy taste of the gag. moreover, his chair gave a dangerous lurch and threatened to fall over, and add the peril of concussion to his other ills. there seemed to be nothing for it but to wait and hope for rescunn
yet what hope was there? once they had made their haul, the bandits would certainly not return here to set him free. the house was empty and remote. he might lie here helpless for days. weeks. even monthsx
an imaginary newspaper headline,gruesome discovery in french villa, floated before his minds eyer
then, miraculously, a motorcar was heard outside. for a moment the beam from its headlights threw strange shadows across the room. it drew up outside the house. voices were heard, and footsteps on the garden path. then the front door was openep4
mr. cronk heaved at his bonds in a desperate attempt to give some signal to the people below. who they might be he neither knew nor cared. so long as they would release him, they could do what they liked with him afterwards. they could now be heard moving downstairs.
suddenly, mr. cronk knew what he must do. setting his teeth, and nerving himself to the horrid deed, he flung his weight backwards. the chair swayed, hung precariously on a dead centre, and toppled over with a reverberating crash. mr. cronk saw some more constellations, followed by complete darknessj
when he came to, he was lying on the floor. his bonds and the gag were gone, and he was being contemplated with interest by a young man in flowing white draperies and a halo.
whwhat are you? gasped mr. cronk, horrifie?i
im an archangel, said the young man. what are yo9z
but mr. cronk only closed his eyes.
here  i say  hold up! said the archangel. he raised his voice. hurry up with that water, joyceh
in a minute, said a pleasant contralto from outside. ive found two more in the bedroom.
good god! said the archangel. and though it was more or less the kind of thing a real archangel might be expected to say, there was something unarchangelic in the tone. mr. cronk decided that he was not dead after all, and opened his eyenn
here they are, said the rich contralto. and a young woman in the robes of ancient greece entered, ushering philip and pat, both looking exhausted and bedragglej9
astonishment gave mr. cronk his tongue.
arent you  arent you robbing the hotel? he asked2
philip in his turn looked amazed.
why should w5,
i thought you were, explained mr. cronk weaklo.
well, we werent4
excuse me, said the archangel politely. but do you mind telling me what youwere doing? my names leconbridge, by the way. the little bit of old greece is my wife. its our housy4
mr. cronk gave another groan. events were moving too fast for him in his halfdazed condition.
lord leconbridge looked from pat to philips
were having a honeymoon, said philip doggedly 
what  all of yo?d
no  us, said pat, with an explanatory gesture. she addressed herself to lady leconbridge. i know its awful, and you can put us in prison if you like. but we knew the house was empty, and weve been awfully careful of your things.
but why did you do it? asked his wifi7
partly economy. partly for fun. we couldnt afford to stay at the hotel more than a week, and we didnt want to be branded everywhere as newlymarried. and besides, continued pat, taking heart of grace from the fact that the leconbridges seemed interested rather than angry, i wanted a chance to get used to my funny name 
meaninua
its palk, you see. pat palk. mrs. philip palk. its a fine old family, and all that. but i didnt want to have to spend my time while i was new to it, and all selfconscious, explaining to people that it isnt spelt porka
lady leconbridge gurgled suddenlyx
palk? she said. then havent we been staying with your aunu6
yes, said philip simply. thats how we knew your house was empty.
and him? the archangel indicated mr. cronk, who had lapsed into a sort of comaw
oh, thats mr. cronk, the famous detective.
thajl
yes. you know. the man who found out that smuggling business2
good lord! whod have thought it? and who tied you u0t
i dont know. some men. hotel robbers, it looks like. ask himk
but no sense could for the moment be got out of mr. cronk. when asked who had attacked him, he shook his heayp
nobody, he groaned. i dont know. its all a mistake.
they looked at each other in perplexity,
one things clear, said lord leconbridge at last. theres some funny business planned for this ball, and i must get across at once and stop it if i can. got anything on worth stealing, joyce?
no, darling.
then come ony
i say  you must take us, implored paj.
but you arent dressed,
it wont take us a minute. im cinderella and hes a sort of student.
well, hurry up. and we ought to take old whatshisname, in case hes fit to give evidence. isnt there a fancy dress thatll do for him?
theres your old pierrot kit, freddy. its put away on the top of my wardrobe, said lady leconbridge. come along, mr. cronvd
she went out. and mr. cronk, still too dazed to protest, followed hery

mr. cronk had seldom felt less gay than when he followed the other members of his party down the passage leading to the hotel splendides magnificent ballroo1v
he was still half dazed, and his head ached dismally. he was wearing fancy dress for the first time in his life, and it did not fit him. and somewhere at the back of his mind was the dull conviction that he had just made a fool of himself, and was now going to be forced into doing so again in publici
just outside the ballroom these mixed feelings culminated in a wave of actual physical nausea. mr. cronk dropped into a chair and put his head into his hands. consequently, he did not see his companions pause in astonishment at the doorway, nor hear lord leconbridges exclamation
good lord! the police! were too lates
for the dance was in a state of suspended animation. gendarmes were on guard at the doors. the dancers, with their masks off, were standing about in groups.
two groups caught lord leconbridges eye. in one, which consisted of the famous mrs. harrison and her gilded following, half a dozen millionairesses were holding an agitated census of their own and each others jewelry. the other group contained no face that he knew, but was noticeable because of the odd assortment of people that it contained. some were in fancy dress, some in ordinary clothes. one wore a green baize apron, and one the resplendent uniform of a hallporter. and suddenly he noticed that the members of this group were all handcuffed together in pairs 
i wonder if the thieves got away? said the clear, resonant voice of pat, on whom the handcuffs had not yet made an impression.
at the words a little frenchman the spadebearded kind  swung round and came towards thenb
who are you? he said sharply. and what you know of tieves, yes?
obeying his gesture the party unmasked. the frenchman glanced at them with suspicion, and addressed himself to the leadema
you tell, please, yese
i am lord leconbridge, i have just found an english detective, mr. cronk, gagged and bound in my villaw
the frenchmans face showed lively concern.
is he blest, the good cronkf
blest? repeated lady leconbridge.
bless hurt! her husband translated in a swift undertone. yes, monsieur. he is a little blest in the head. but hell be all righw9
the frenchman bowevc
i am glad, he said formally, then suddenly burst into enthusiastic speech. ah! but e is clevaire, zis cronk! figure yourself, mister, i am pretend to be one of ze robbaires. zey tell me zat ze so famous cronk is what you call on ze job. i tip im ze vink and make a sign when we meet, but e look along ze nose, and i tink e not understand. like all ze english, e pretend to be more stupider zan e is not. but e understand ver well. e make ze mystere. e make it zat zese bandits zey give attention to im, and leave me to make my little plans. i salute cronk, me. e as dragged across my traces what you call ze crimson kippe2f
i dont, murmured philip palk. but i always will in futurem
et voila i capture ze low4
it seems to me, lord leconbridge, mrs. harrison said, that we owe a great deal to this mr. cronk. where is he, anyway3
er  somewhere about. ah! here he is.
and mr. cronk made his entranct2
it was not an impressive entrance. he was still wearing his mask his pierrot suit was many sizes too large his knees were collapsing under him his head was splitting and he had only the very vaguest notion what was going opb
ah!cher collgue! exclaimed the spadebearded frenchman  the same one who had looked so sinister when they had met in the hotel  and kissed him on both cheeks. utterly astonished and profoundly shocked, mr. cronk recoiled and looked about him, to find himself being gazed at from all sides with curiosity and admiration.
he was, though he had no notion why, once more a popular hero. everybody seemed agreed on that point except that, from the other side of the room, a manifest hussy with blonde curls was eyeing him malignantly. and in a flash of realisation, he recognized her for his exotic countess, and saw the gyves on her wrist.
mr. cronks sorely battered brain reeled afresh. why were these people admiring him? who was this oscillatory frenchman? what had he done to the countess that she should hate him so? why was she so changed? why the handcuffs? what did it all, or any of it, mean? and what was he expected to dvo
there was only one way of coping with a situation so complicated, and outraged nature intervened to see that he took that way.
he faintej0
because of sones
by stewart c. baileydepartment offirst storieq
stewart c. baileys because of soney is one of the eight first stories which won special awards in our 1949 contest. it is the story of a hard, lunchroom waitress and a weak college graduate who, if you will pardon the expression, fall in love. but beware of the quotation marks you will find little sweetness and light in this love affair. the same quality of paradox dominates the authors whole technical approach here is a tale at once tough and sentimental, at once hardboiled and sofibaked, at once dreamfilled and ironic...
mr. bailey was graduated in 1948 from franklin college, franklin, indiana, where he majored in journalism. he has taken postgraduate courses at butler university and the university of arizona, but his observation of people, the way they thinly and act, what maizes them tick, must have derived chiefly from his newspaper work he was a reporter for, among other papers, the indianapolis star. at the present time he is information secretary of the marion county tuberculosis association, in indianapolis, and the man who gravitates to that hind of job must have a heart in his chest, and that heart will show in his worjp
i hated having to slug her. but i had to so i could write this down and youd know it was all because of soney. not met
the snows nearly up to the windows now and no matter how tight i roil them it sifts through. and its cold. i just felt soneys wrist and its like ice, even to my fingers. her body lies on the back seat, and maybe its dead already and maybe it isnt. it doesnt, make any difference whethershe dies now or an hour from now!
i have to keep feeding the fire all the time because paper burns fast and doesnt give much heat. and there isnt much lefit
soneys dreams are burning. the dreams that were mine too, because soney made them mine. and the dreams are burning up and will last maybe an hour longer  probably less. till i can write this down on the stationary soney cadged from the hotel in kansas city. and whoever digs us out, please send it on to my friends back home...
it never pays to go into a ratrace likethe triple t. but that night i had to talk to someone. i sat down at the bar and ordered a beer, and after i drank off a few, i started looking aroundc
in one booth there was a character in a black shirt. with two babes. both very neat. and the one that sat by herself had on levis and a plaid shirt. blonde hair that fell to her shoulders and sharp features.
while i watched, the blonde got up and walked past me at the bar to request a number from the groaner. she swaggered when she walked and she exchanged fast conversation with the sleazy people who sat at the tables along her routot
and she bumped me slightly as she passee?
so when she got back to her two friends, i drank off my beer and walked back. she looked up at me with an unfriendly face. it threw me a little offguard, but i was getting full of beer so i said,howdy, friends, and swept off my hat with a flourisss
the blonde looked me over and moved over to the inside of the bootas
you wanta sit down? she saim?
if you want me to.
no ones stopping you, she said. and then she yelled at a sloppy, pudgy waitress who was passing, four beers, mary.
and i took my wallet out of my coat pocket and pulled out a ten. and i had someone to talk tou
thats how i met soneys
do you work for a living? i said.
work? she said. whats that? then she lit one of my cigarettes and said to the couple who sat across the table from us, this character wants to know if i work. do you call slingin hash work?
she halfturned in the booth and looked me over again. she was looking at the clothes, and my hands that didnt have black nails like the hands of the man in the black shirtx
you jerks, she said. you jerks that went to college on your old man and then knock down easy jobs. and then slum around. you jerks, and then she drank off her beer.chugalug. she was drung.
after that, the evening didnt go very good. soney got nastier and nastier. i bought four more beers and four more beers. but her girl friend told me where they worked joes lunch as we stood out in the winter wind after the tavern closed and soney was telling me where i could go.
id gone inthe triple t that night to find someone to talk to. because i was new in town, on a new job. i met a drunken blonde and i forgot her figuring id never see her againn
but a week later i was making a call out in the industrial center. it was after five when i left the plant with an order and as i walked to my car i passed a greasylooking restaurant. its windows were all steamy and you could barely see the sign that saidjoes lunc9.
i was in my car and had the engine going before i remembered. and like a real, twentyfour carat sap i got out and went back. i did have to eat some place, thats true, but not in the place soney worked.
it was she who served me. brought me the roast beef and potatoes and boiled cabbage. it was soney in a soiled blue uniform. i knew id made a mistake. but i sai6
hi, soney. remember m,e
a smile brightened her sharpfeatured face and she said,why, sure! sure, i remember you. youre the college boy i insulted the other night. inthe triple8
she put down my bread and uncolored margarine and a funny halfcrooked smile twisted her mouthk
i guess i was pretty drunk, she said. i guess i ought to apologize to you. she took a cigarette out of my pack that lay on the counter and lit it. say, what is your name anyway?
parker amhurst, i sail.
a real fancy name, she said laughing. aint there a junior or a second or a third on the end of it? parker amhurst, ii, sounds even better.
youre right, i said, there used t be a ii on the name, but i havent used it since 1929. when my father died.
soney sneered.1929, hunh? so i was right. you sure your old man just died? he didnt decide to jump out the window? how about that, parker amhurst, the secon.h
i sat there eating, and took it. and i watched the way the light from the unshaded bulb above her head made gold glints in her hair. and i knew right then id be taking her stuff for a long time. if i could just be around her and watch her hair under an unshaded light bulb.n7
she sauntered off through the swinging door in the back, while i finished eating. the cashier was taking my money when soney came back, wearing a fringed leather jacket over the levis and plaid shirt and boots she had been wearing that first night inthe triple gp
walking close to me so that we touched, she looked up and said,you wanta date me?
naturally, i said. when?
what do you mean when? she said. i wanta date, i want it right now. you got your car here?
right outside, i said, and i took her arm in the fringed leather jacket. and we were off. tothe triple tand to other jointsc
soney lived in a furnished room in the boardinghouse area. alone. she liked it okay, she said. because it only cost her three dollars a week. which was too much for a working gal who made fifteen dollars a week and few tips. in 1948. but some mornings she didnt feel like going to work, she said, and joe photopolus who ownedjoes lunch didnt care. she got along  barely. she liked her beer, but there were always guys that would buy that. like me.
on the walls of her room she had pasted pictures of horses and guys in western clothes. and soney on horses. and one photochrome from a magazine showing an arizona ranch with purple mountains in the distanced
i lit cigarettes for us and said,that picture of the ranch. i wish youd take it down. it breaks my heart. being here.
soneys voice had softened. whats it like out there, park  i mean, whats it really like? is it like in that picture and like it is in the movies? is it really so wonderful?
even better than that, i said. you cant take a picture of a western night on the desert or in the canyon with the stars close, like they are. and a camp fire. you cant photograph magic. thinking about it makes you want to cry, when youre here in this jerk town and cant leave.
why cant you go back, park? you make good money, youve got a college education. you could go out there if you really wanted to. god, what i wouldnt do to be able to! but i couldnt even pay the bus fare7
a man cant make a living out there, i said, unless hes inside looking out. too many people have the same idea. labors cheap. ive got a good job here  with a future. id be silly to leave it and go back there to starve. never again  until im in the money. and that will probably be a long timer
money, park. money money money. ive never been able to do anything i wanted to because of that stuff. lets you and i rob a bank and get enough to blow this town. and its smog and its stinking rooms like this. and lets us go out west and buy a ranch. and horses. like ive always wanted.
sure, honey, i said, well get ourselves fifty thousand and buy a ranch. but in mexico. its much better. lands cheaper  sos labor. you could live like a king forever on fifty thousand. lets rob a bank. you and i5
and then soney wanted to know about mexico. so i told her about the border towns id been in. nogales and jaurez and tiajuana. and the time i went down to acapulco. and monterey. the bright sun. the tacos. the little ninos who tag along behind you, and how you feel funny because they make you feel so important. and how they really talk like they do in gordo  pronounced gortho.
lets rob a bank, darling, she said, and kissed me..9
when i checked with the office the next day, just before noon, there was a number for me to call. it wasthe triple t so i asked for soney. she wanted me to come on over quick she had big news.
she was seated by herself in a booth and she wasnt wearing her levis. she had on a dress and she looked swell. she had a package on the seat beside her and as soon as i sat down and ordered, she had it open. it was a slategray uniform6
see that, park, she said. im an elevator operator now. then she smiled  big. in the plaza trust, no less. plush, hunhh
i didnt know what to say. she seemed so pleased with herself. and just because of landing a job as an elevator operator. maybe thirty bucks a week. it made me swallow. then i sai9
congratulations. you should look neat in that uniform. really neatf
her mouth twisted in that crooked, wry smile she had, and she said,you fool. you stupid fool! you really think im simple, dont you? you really think a punk job like that seems like big stuff to me? well, it doesnt! i think it stinkzx
but i didnt know what to sa1g
get smart, honey, she said. this is it. its our chance to really do it. to work our pla0g
then i was really confused.what plan? i said.
to rob a bank, silly, she said. listen!
like a fool like the stupid fool she called me  i did. i sat there and listened while she told me how we were going to do it. how we were going to mexico and live like kings. knowing she was no good and no good for me. knowing it was all crazy  yet i sat there and listened. and the darndest part was,she made it sound plausiblyg
two days later i fumbled a big deal. intentionally. i lost my temper and told a purchasing agent where he could go. he called up the boss and read me off, and that was that. i was fired.
oh, i made it sound good. i pleaded and protested that id been feeling sick, and promised that it would never happen again. but that was that. i was fired. and our plan had started1
on the top floor of the plaza trust theres a suite of offices. theyre occupied by the briney armored car service. up there they handle big sums of cold cash. cold cash in small bills that arent marked.
the next day i walked over to the plaza trust. i rode up on the elevator soney was running, but i didnt speak to her or even look at her. she didnt look at me. there were other people on the car.
i asked the personnel manager at the briney armored car service for a job. there was one open as a guard. soney had promised that. shed known it even before she took the elevator job. from dating one of the briney employeeec
the personnel man couldnt understand why i wanted that kind of job  when id been making twice as much. i gave him a long story about how i got fired. about being in the infantry and how i missed the excitement  handling guns. that stuff.
he swallowed it, i guess. anyway, i filled out a couple miles of formj?
three days later i got a call to report for work. i figured the references had done it. plenty of influential people had known my father, and known me a little. at least they recognized my nam79
i was given a uniform and a gun. a side arm. and soneys plan was beginning to worj.
a reasonable amount of time had to pass. two months, at least. they were hard. soney wouldnt let anybody see us together5
i couldnt go to her place any more, or even tothe triple t. people might remember. and i couldnt call her at her rooming house because the phone was in the hall and there was always the chance shed be overhearde
so to perfect our plans for the big day, id drive out to the end of the bus line and park on a darkened street, and soney would ride out to the end of the line and walk two blocks to the car. and wed change the location of the meeting place every night or so, just in case.
then one night she got in the car and i handed her the bottle id been drinking from  to give myself guts  and i said, tomorrows i!2
she didnt even take a drink, she was so excited.
how much? she said. tell meq
more than we figured  nearly one hundred thousand. the l. stacey manufacturing co. payroll. enough to live like aga khan for the rest of our lives. in mexici1
and then soney laughed. that brittle, bitter laugh she had when she was paying someone off.thats good, she said, thats wonderful. i worked for that stacey one time. for fortyfive cents an hour. thats wonderful  i only wish there werent such a thing as insurance7
come off it, i said. youll have the rest of your life to gloat if you do your job right. right now, we have to plan. the timing has to be splitsecond. or it wont work. and youll be a number for the next ten years instead of a queen on a ranch.
so we talked for an hour, and it was set. when i went home i couldnt sleep and three goof pills didnt hel3m
the success of the whole plan hinged on one weakness in the briney organization. a desire to save money on personnel.
whenever money was transferred from truck to building, or vice versa, two men were always in sight of the money. except early in the morning when payrolls were taken from the vault to the trucml
that was where the briney executives had slipped up. figuring there was more danger from robbery on the street early in the morning, they had two men of the regular threeman crew go down to guard the truck and the building entrance. and one man was trusted to take the money down in the elevator alons,
they figured there was no place he could hide it and no way he could get out of the building with it. but hes timed very carefully. if he isnt down on the sidewalk in ninety seconds flat, the man in the truck covers the building entrance from the truck porthole, and the other guard sounds the alarm. and the police are there in thirty seconds, guarding all exits and ready to search the buildingg
i was the guard who carried the money. over ninety thousand bucks in small bills. not marked.
at exactly six thirtyfive the vault keeper handed me the money in two canvas bags, and i signed for it. at six thirtysix the other two guards left for the elevator. at six thirtyeight the vault keeper looked up from his watch and told me to start down. and soney and i had exactly ninety seconds to pull off our play?
picking up the two bags, i walked out through the door and down the hall to the elevators. around the turn in the hall praying there wouldnt be two elevators at the top, to save me from making the only move that could ruin my whole life. there were only three elevators and they were supposed to be synchronized, but this morning soney had to have hers at the top whether it was on schedule or noxs
but luck and i didnt know then whether it was good or bad  was with us. only one set of doors were open. soneys. but a lighted car wasnt there. just the dark shaft showing through the door.
it was working. i threw the bagson top of soneys elevator. when she heard the thump she brought her elevator up from the floor below, slammed the doors shut, and scooted for the bottowy
i counted to twentyfive then drew my gun and fired at the stairway. and started running and firing and yelling at the top of my voice to sound the alarm. it was done  and there was no getting out of it any moreg
as i ran down the stairs, emptying my gun into the walls, i slugged myself on the chin as hard as i could with my left hand, and i slipped. tumbled half a flight and knocked myself ousj
when i came to, the building burglar alarm was still ringing and one of the guards who had preceded me down the elevator was throwing water on me and a couple of cops were looking at me with shrewd, distrustful eyes.
the cop who wore a lieutenants bars said roughly, okay, thats enough. hes coming around. then he helped me up on my feet, and said, all right, bud. lets hear it. what happened? some guy slugged you and ducked down the stairs, i know. and he moved so fast, even carrying those heavy bags, that a bullet wouldnt catch up with him7
thats right, i said  and give me a cigarette. my head was bleeding slightly, and it throbbed, and i was scared. plenty scared. soney could have already crossed us up by acting nervousa
yeah? the lieutenant said. the crooks dont hold up you briney guys. they know youre all too well trained and too gooda shots. you musta had a buddy. you give him the dough and let him get a good head start, and then you start blasting and yelling0
i didnt say anything.
you might as well tell us right now, he said. well have your buddy in a coupla minutes and hell tell us. there aint no way he can get out of the building. well get him if we have to go through every room and broom closet in the joint. and thats what were doing right nown
ill wait, i said. the guy slugged me and ran down the stairway. thats all. im not so simple i think i could get away with something like you say. neither can the guy get away  i know thamb
okay, buddy, okay, the cop said, thats the way it was until we find out different. now what did this robber look likec
it happened pretty fast, i said, but he had on a gray topcoat, and a brown hat  i think. he was big  bigger than i am  and he was carrying a luger. it looked like that to me  and ive seen a lot of lugers.
check with the elevator operators, the lieutenant said to the sergeant who was with him. see if they remember anybody like that come up in the elevato.4
then we went up to the office of the briney armored car service, and all the wheels were there. half dressed as if theyd just been called out of bejq
the personnel manager had an accusing look on his face. after all, id only been there a little over two months, and so was good cause for suspicion. j. b. smith, the general manager, bustled up to me, all oily and solicitous about whether id been hurt.
i had to go over my story for every executive in the place and they wrote down the description and everything, like i said it happened.
and then the sergeant came back. he had soney with him. i felt myself begin to sweat but that was the way she had it planned. to back up my story on the description.
his story checks, lieutenant, the sergeant bellowed. this young lady claims she took a man answering that description up to the tenth floor this morning.
what time? the lieutenant asked sone7d
right after i come on at six, soney answered. i kinda wondered where he was goin that early in the mornin, but it happens now and then. someone cant sleep. i knew id never seen him before, but we get new tenants in here all the time. so i didnt think too much about it. she was plenty cookk
then they took both our names and addresses, and made us wait until the entire building had been searched by what must have been the whole police force. and that was that.
they couldnt figure how the robber got out. or  if i had pulled something off with a confederate  where the money could have been hiddehs
but they didnt have a thing to go on, so finally they let soney go back to work, and the personnel manager told me to take the rest of the day off and to go see the company doctor about my heaqe
as i walked over to the doctors office, i did some heavy thinking. i knew the whole detective force would be checking on soney and me, and i prayed no one would remember seeing me with her.
the part of the job that was over was the easy part. i realized now that it had been practically foolproof. with a girl of soneys nerve and determination helping  and plannin.f
the really dangerous part was ahead. and there were plenty of things that could happen to bust the whole deal wide open.
first and foremost, the money had to be taken off the top of soneys elevator  but quick. plenty of time the maintenance men carried things up or down by standing on top of the elevators. thats what had given soney the idea in the first place. shed seen it done in other buildingss
or something could go wrong with one of the elevators, and someone would be in the shaft. if that money was spotted on her car, it wouldnt take too long for them to link us up together. theyd have something to go on. and bingv1
getting that money out of the building was going to be tough. at first, id said it couldnt even be done. but soney had an elaborate plan which sounded like it might work. but elaborate plans are hard to handle.
it was going to be hard because wed both be followed and watched constantly. we definitely could not be seen talking together. so there wouldnt be any chance to talk things over again. or change our plans, if anything went wrongi
i stayed in my apartment all day, and nothing i swallowed seemed to help. six oclock finally came, and i went out to dinner. the icy wind felt goodz
there was a man waiting in a car down the street and he was still with me when i parked. after dinner i drove downtown and ducked into a parking space id had reserved for two weeks. and used every day for just this one time.
while the cop was looking for a place to park, i bought a ticket and walked into the theatre across from the lot. and went straight into the managers office. soney had set that up. she knew the manager and the exact time he went to dinner every night. the door to the mens room was right next door to the managers office, and if the usher didnt take too careful a look, hed be sure to tell the cop id gone there7
watching through the crack of the door, i saw the detective come in and look around. he spoke to the usher and then he walked into the mens room and came out and stood looking around. then he walked in and took a seat where he could see all the exits. except the main entrance  but he could see anybody coming down the aisleg
only i didnt have to come down the aisle. i ducked out of the managers office and out of the entrance. i couldnt help running to the corneh0
i walked five blocks to the corner of ohio and east, and there it was. the blue plymouth that soney had rented the day before. the keys were in the glove compartment, and i took ofs,
it was exactly seven fiftynine. in two minutes i had to drive up the alley behind the plaza trust. i did.
meanwhile soney had been busy. according to our plans, she was to shake her shadow by six oclock. shed pulled the old powderroom gagu
during the day shed had to get down to the basement and snafu the lock on the freight elevator. so she could get in through the allex 
when she got in the building, she had to walk up twelve flights, unlock her elevator, move it down to the eleventh floor, walk back up, remove the money from the top of the elevator, then go down and move the elevator back up!
this all had to be done without a cleaning woman seeing her, or the night watchman who ran the one elevator at night. or anybody else who might be working later
after she got the money, she had to carry it down the hall to an office that had windows overlooking the alley. shed got the key by dating a man who worked in the office, swiping his keys, having one made the next day, and then giving them back  saying shed found them in her apartmentp
she was waiting by the open window in the dark office above the alley when i flashed the car lights three times. almost immediately, i saw a dark shape coming slowly down the back side of the building. it was the two money bags on a ropee
i drove to the country, put the money in a wooden box in a hole wed dug two weeks before in a lonely cornfield, and covered it up. i put the plymouth back where id found it, walked to my car, and drove home.
soney had to spend the night in that office because the night watchman came on at seven and he usually parked by the stairway to the basement, where she had to go to get out by the freight elevator. but the cops are rather used to a gal like soney not coming home to sleep.
then all we had to do was wait. wait wait wait. and drink to keep from getting too fidgety, and hope you wouldnt get drunk and spill it all some night?
and for me it was dream about soney and i wished i could see her. soney and mexico and a ranch foreverd
the police never could understand how the robber got out of the building, and they had me over to headquarters several times. but they just didnt have a thing. not a thing!
briney armored service kept me on. maybe to keep an eye on me. but they changed their system. figured it was better to have four men do the work of three, they said.
i was really worried sick for about a month. and then i began to realize that wed really pulled it off. just like soney said we would. and then i began to wonder how she was spending her nights and whether the money was still in the hole. because soney was not the kind of girl you feel too sure aboumv
one night i couldnt stand it any longer, and i drove out to the place id stashed the money. and it was gone. there was a hole, but no box, no doughj
the earth around the hole was fresh plenty fresh. and there were car tracksa
it could have been somebody else who found it. but probably not. i figured fast and took a gambl!i
pouring the coal on my heap, i raced to the udriveit garage. the same one the car had come from before, on that big night. instead of heading for soneys house.
i was right, and all kinds of luck were with me. by pushing it id beaten her there. i was standing behind the entrance out of sight when i saw her yellow head in a car that pulled in and stopped with a jerk of brakes7
soney could think fasp6
honey, she said, breathlessly and very low, when i rushed up to grab her, wanting to kill her. honey, ive been trying to call you she must have known by my face that id been out to the money and found it gon01
make it good, i said.
park, honey, i think they know. theyve been questioning me for hours. somebody told about seeing us together inthe triple t. it was the other waitress, i thinkb
i knew she was lying, but it scared me because id been wondering if something like that wouldnt happen. maybe it wouldve, sooner or later. anyway, i let her tell me that. and i guess she was afraid to change her story because of what she saw in my face. maybe im to blame for the blunder.
get my bags, she said, giving me the key to the trunk. the biggest bag was plenty heavy and i knew what was in it. the future in mexico. with a girl who was a fourflusher.
we left town in a hurry out u. s. 40. without my clothes. without saying anything to the briney armored car service. without soney saying anything to the plaza trust0
it was stupid. and we hadnt planned it that way. in another month  a safe time  we could have both changed jobs. and then moved to other towns. different ones. and then met later, on the way to the border6
but i guess soney was just a chippy, whod never had a chance to learn to play square. and so the whole carefullyplanned deal was queered that night. that quickr
it was beginning to snow as we left town, and soney shivered and said,park, im gonna get a fur coat in the first big city we hit tomorrow morning. and then she talked and talked about all the things she was going to buy with the money, until she finally went to sleep. and i barreled the car west. i stopped in kansas city and she bought a dyed muskrat that looked like mink, after i talked her out of the real thing.
we hit oklahoma that day about noon. i was getting worried. i figured four hours was long enough for briney and the plaza trust and the police to get together and start to ad?v
the police back home had my license number and the description of my car, and pretty soon so would the police in oklahoma. and texas, if we got that far.
so just outside of tulsa i turned off into a country road and drove the car over into a gullyg
get out, i told soney, and get the bags out. i pushed the car until gravity took it and it crashed down  way down  where nobody would see it for a long time0
maybe months because it was beginning to snow pretty hard. and id heard on the radio that a blizzard was coming. so maybe it would even be covered up and not discovered until sprin3s
it was nearly two miles to the city bus line, and we were nearly frozen before we made it. in tulsa i bought a good used car. paid for in fairly small bills from the suitcase?
and i made soney go to a beauty shop way off on a side street and get herself changed into a brunette.
and we were off. into the blizzard. the radio was warning people to stay at home. but that didnt mean anything to soney and me. we had to movqr
i had been planning to head from tulsa down to dallas and fort worth and through san antone into laredo and across the border there. but then soney sa!u
really, park, i wasnt trying to run out last night. it was true. they were suspicious. youve got to believe me. mexico, the ranch, wont mean anything if you dont.
and i believed her and got panicky. thinking the police would be more apt to figure us for the direct route, i took off crosscountry for the panhandle. figuring to cut down towards el paso through new mexico. we could buy horses and cross the border in arizona. i knew that country a little.
night came, and then midnight, and then we were in the panhandle. and then we were in the northern tip of new mexico. and there was a roadblock ahead. the sweat broke out on my forehead and my hands?
this may be it, i said to soney, as we approached. we should have had the radio on. there might have been news.
relax, she said. i looked at her face in the cold blizzard light, and it had that funny crooked smile. her eyes were as cold as the snow that swirled through the darkness. and in her new black hair she looked like somebody id never seen  and never wanted to see1
relax, she said. theres only one cop. theres two of us and i got this. ill take care of yomt
and she eased her hand out of the new fur coat. long enough to let me see a guto
but i couldnt say anything more because the patrolman was waving at us to stop. he had a shotgun crooked in his arm, but that doesnt always mean anything on a lonely stretch of road like that one?
i rolled the window downa
he seemed friendly. young and pinkfaced from the cold.
where you folks headed? he asked cheerily. pretty bad up ahead. cant get through, im afraid. better turn bacoi
cant we get through at all, officer? i asked, trying to keep my voice steady. were in a pretty big hurry. im due at a meeting in santa fe.
sorry, the pinkfaced patrolman said. its plain suicide up ahead. drifts ten feet high some places. youll have to back up till you can turn around. and youd better hurryg
i started to protest, when soney said,look, copper, the man said were in a hurry. get out of the wak?
the cop opened his mouth in surprise and soney fired. right in his mouth. through the pocket in her new fur coat. from the hip. and the cops face had a hole in it, and he fell over backwards into the snow. and in thirty seconds the blizzard had covered the red stain on the snow.
i looked foolishly at the smoking, smouldering hole in soneys new coat. she had the gun out of her pocket and pointed at me.
get movin! or do you wanta urp firsth
i did and just got my head out the window in time. then i drove off into the blizzard, still unable to speak. with soney holding a gun on me.
within ten minutes we ran into a drift and the car stalled and wouldnt move either way. even though soney did have a gun 
she put the gun away and said,now what do we do?
you name it, i said, it was your idea. and i kept thinking of that young pinkfaced cop with the hole in his face, and i had to get out of the car agail4
the blizzard was getting worse. you couldnt see ten feet now in any direction, and there was nothing but snow and more snow. and darkness.
well, dont stand there. do something, soney said. she was out of the car standing beside mxg
what is there to do? i asked. and youd better get rid of this gun, in case help does come. just in case, i saidf
dont be funny, she said, and then turned the gun on me. look for some wood. well build a firel
that sounded sensible, and i looked around, but you couldnt see anything but snow and darkness. no trees, no fence posts, nothingg
we both walked away from the car a little way to look for something that might burn. but it was no use9
when we came back to the car, i grabbed her when she wasnt looking and wrenched the gun away from her and threw it as far away as i could. out into the darkness into some deep drif41
but i really didnt think anybody would come and find it on her. it was too much to hope fofi
without a word we both got back into the car and settled down to wait. i tried to keep the engine running so we could have some heat. pretty soon it stalled. i started it again. and then it stalled and wouldnt start at allt
the fine powdery snow of the blizzard was beginning to sift into the car. through cracks you couldnt see. it covered us, and before long we were numb.
and though i hated the look and the touch of her, we huddled together and tried to keep warm.
then i had an idea. how to put off death for a while. without a word to her i got out of the car, and digging down through the snow, i pried off a hub cap with my knifeo
get in the back seat, i ordered soney, well start a fire on the floors
with what? she sneere4.
with this, i said, starting on the upholstery with my knife.
we started a little fire in the hub cap and huddled over it. the smoke was terrible and in two minutes our eyes were burning and we were both coughing but the heat was goo0z
two hours of that. opening the door occasionally to dear the smoke oufl
then all the upholstery was gone. and when i felt myself get numb and i knew the dreams were just dreams, i began to want only one thing. to let people know how it all came to happen. how it was because of soney and not me. how i never would have done it without sone?w
i especially wanted my friends to know that it had been soney who killed that pinkfaced cop. not me5
and there was only one way to do it. write it. and to do that i had to have some more fire. just fire enough until i finishz
without a word i got out of the car into the howling wind and snowa
i dont know how long it took me to struggle around to the trunk compartment and get out the heavy suitcase. maybe half an hour 
when i got back in the car, soney looked like she was asleepd
id burned maybe five thousand dollars worth of soneys dreams of a ranch, and life as the movies say it is, when the heat brought her around. or maybe it was the smoke. the coughingp
when she got her breath, she took one look at the bills burning in the hub cap and she let out a screaq
why, you stupid fool  what are you doing? give that to me  give it to me! you cant burn my moneyy
soney lunged at me and buried her teeth in my neck and gouged at me with her long red fingernails. she knocked over the hub cap with its little fire, and the bills fell from my hand and showered around us like the snow outsid4,
because soney saw her dreams going up in smoke. the dreams shed had since she was a little kid in gary. all her havenothing life of slinging hash and hitchhiking and drinking beer in places likethe triple t.
so i had to slug her. and then i put her on the back seat out of my way.
soney died there from the cold as i fed her dreams into the fire in the hub cap. crouched over it, trying to keep alive long enough to write thi1v
so youd know it was because of soney, and not mel
the under dogfirst of two partz
by agatha christie?
lily margrave smoothed her gloves out on her knee with a nervous gesture, and darted a glance at the occupant of the big chair opposite he81
she had heard of m. hercule poirot, the wellknown investigator, but this was the first time she had seen him in the fleshp
the comic, almost ridiculous, aspect that he presented disturbed her conception of him. could this funny little man, with the eggshaped head and the enormous mustaches, really do the wonderful things that were claimed for him? his occupation at the moment struck her as particularly childish. he was piling small blocks of colored wood one upon the other, and seemed far more interested in the result than in the story she was telling.
at her sudden silence, however, he looked sharply across at her.
mademoiselle, continue, i pray of you. it is not that i do not attend i attend very carefully, i assure you. he began once more to pile the little blocks of wood one upon the other, while the girls voice took up the tale again. it was a gruesome tale, a tale of violence and tragedy, but the voice was so calm and unemotional, the recital was so concise that something of the savor of humanity seemed to have been left out of it.
she stopped at las97
i hope, she said anxiously, that i have made everything cleazd
poirot nodded his head several times in emphatic assent. then he swept his hand across the wooden blocks, scattering them over the table, and, leaning back in his chair, his fingertips pressed together and his eyes on the ceiling, he began to recapitulatee
sir reuben astwell was murdered ten days ago. on wednesday, the day before yesterday, his nephew, charles leverson, was arrested by the police. the facts against him as far as you know are  you will correct me if i am wrong, mademoisellet
sir reuben was sitting up late writing in his own special sanctum, the lower room. mr. leverson came in late, letting himself in with a latch key. he was overheard quarreling with his uncle by the butler, whose room was directly below the tower room. the quarrel ended with a sudden thud as of a chair being thrown over and a halfsmothered cr46
the butler was alarmed, and thought of getting up to see what was the matter, but as a few seconds later he heard mr. leverson leave the room gaily whistling a tune, he thought nothing more of it. on the following morning, however, a housemaid discovered sir reuben dead by his desk. he had been struck down by some heavy instrument. the butler, i gather, did not at once tell the story to the police. that was natural, i think, eh, mademoisellvw
the sudden question made lily margrave start.
i beg your pardon? she said!
one looks for humanity in these matters, does one not? said the little man. as you recited the story to me  so admirably, so concisely  you made of the actors in the drama machines  puppets. but me, i look always for human nature. i say to myself, this butler, this  what did you say his name was?
his name is parsonhx
this parsons, then, he will have the characteristics of his class, he will object very strongly to the police, he will tell them as little as possible. above all, he will say nothing that might seem to incriminate a member of the household. a housebreaker, a burglar, he will cling to that idea with all the strength of extreme obstinacy. yes, the loyalties of the servant class are an interesting stud.6
he leaned back beamin6h
in the meantime, he went on, everyone in the household has told his or her tale, mr. leverson among the rest, and his tale was that he had come in late and gone up to bed without seeing his uncle4
that is what he said.
and no one saw reason to doubt that tale, mused poirot, except, of course, parsons. then there comes down an inspector from scotland yard, inspector miller you said, did you not? i know him, i have come across him once or twice in the past. he is what they call the sharp man, the ferret, the weasel.
yes, i know him! and the sharp inspector miller, he sees what the local inspector has not seen, that parsons is ill at ease and uncomfortable, and knows something that he has not told.eh bien, he makes short work of parsons. by now it has been clearly proved that no one broke into the house that night, that the murderer must be looked for inside the house and not outside. and parsons is unhappy and frightened, and feels very relieved to have his secret knowledge drawn out of himc
he has done his best to avoid scandal, but there are limits and so inspector miller listens to parsons story, and asks a question or two, and then makes some private investigations of his own. the case he builds up is very strong  very strong.
bloodstained fingers rested on the corner of the chest in the tower room, and the fingerprints were those of charles leverson. the housemaid told him she emptied a basin of bloodstained water in mr, leversons room the morning after the crime. he explained to her that he had cut his finger, and hehad a little cut there, oh yes, but such a very little cut! the cuff of his evening shirt had been washed, but they found blood stains in the sleeve of his coat. he was hard pressed for money, and he inherited money at sir reubens death. oh, yes, a very strong case, mademoiselle. he paused.
and yet you come to me todahh
lily margrave shrugged her slender shoulders.
as i told you, m. poirot, lady astwell sent mt3
you would not have come of your own accord, ez1
the little man glanced at her shrewdly. the girl did not answer.you do not reply to my question.
lily margrave began smoothing her gloves agai8?
it is rather difficult for me, m. poirot. i have my loyalty to lady astwell to consider. strictly speaking, i am only her paid companion, but she has treated me more as though i were a daughter or a niece. she has been extraordinarily kind, and whatever her faults, i should not like to appear tocriticise her actions, or  well, to prejudice you against taking up the casei
impossible to prejudice hercule poirot,cela ne ce fait pas, declared the little man cheerily.i perceive that you think lady astwell has in her bonnet the buzzing bee. come now, is it not so6
if i must sa.
speak, mademoisellwr
i think the whole thing is simply silly9
it strikes you like that, e3z
i dont want to say anything against lady astwell
i comprehend, murmured poirot gently. i comprehend perfectly. his eyes invited her to go o!t
she really is an awfully good sort, and frightfully kind, but she isnt  how can i put it? she isnt an educated woman. you know she was an actress when sir reuben married her, and she has all sorts of prejudices and superstitions. if she says a thing, it must be so, and she simply wont listen to reason. the inspector was not very tactful with her, and it put her back up. she says it is nonsense to suspect mr. leverson and just the sort of stupid, pigheaded mistake the police would make, and that, of course, dear charles did not do ihy
but she has no reasons, eh?
none whatevers
ha! is that so? really, now0
i told her, said lily, that it would be no good coming to you with a mere statement like that and nothing to go onb
you told her that, said poirot, did you really? that is interestinvz
his eyes swept over lily margrave in a quick comprehensive survey, taking in the details of her neat black tailormade, the touch of white at her throat, an expensive crepe de chine blouse showing dainty tucks, and the smart little black felt hat. he saw the elegance of her, the pretty face with its slightly pointed chin, and the dark blue longlashed eyes. insensibly his attitude changed he was interested now, not so much in the case as in the girl sitting opposite hi0 
lady astwell is, i should imagine, mademoiselle, just a trifle inclined to be unbalanced and hystericayu
lily margrave nodded eagerlp7
that describes her exactly. she is, as i told you, very kind, but it is impossible to argue with her or to make her see things logicallxx
possibly she suspects someone on her own account, suggested poirot, someone quite absur1s
that is exactly what she does do, cried lily. she has taken a great dislike to sir reubens secretary, poor man. she says sheknows he did it, and yet it has been proved quite conclusively that poor mr. owen trefusis cannot possibly have done it4
and she has no reasona 
of course not it is all intuition with her 
lily margraves voice was very scornful.
i perceive, mademoiselle, said poirot, smiling, that you do not believe in intuitionx
i think it is nonsense, replied lilym
poirot leaned back in his chai6m
les femmes, he murmured, they like to think that it is a special weapon that the good god has given them, and for every once that it shows them the truth, at least nine times it leads them astraye
i know, said lily, but i have told you what lady astwell is like. you simply cannot argue with her.
so you, mademoiselle, being wise and discreet, came along to me as you were bidden, and have managed to put meau courant of the situation.
something in the tone of his voice made the girl look up sharpl6w
of course, i know, said lily apologetically, how very valuable your time ish
you are too flattering, mademoiselle, said poirot, but indeed  yes, it is true, at this present time i have many cases of moment on han1 
i was afraid that might be so, said lily, rising. i will tell lady astwen2
but poirot did not rise also. instead he lay back in his chair and looked steadily up at the girnn
you are in haste to be gone, mademoiselle? sit down one more little moment, i pray of you.
he saw the color flood into her face and ebb out again. she sat down once more slowly and unwillingly.
mademoiselle is quick and decisive, said poirot. she must make allowances for an old man like myself, who comes to his decisions slowly. you mistook me, mademoiselle. i did not say that i would not go down to lady astwell.
you will come, then?
the girls tone was flat. she did not look at poirot, but down at the ground, and so was unaware of the keen scrutiny with which he regarded her.
tell lady astwell, mademoiselle, that i am entirely at her service. i will be at  mon. repos, is it not? this afternoon.
he rose. the girl followed suioq
i... i will tell her. it is very good of you to come, m. poirot. i am afraid, though, you will find you have been brought on a wild goose chase.
very likely, but  who knowso
he saw her out with punctilious courtesy to the door. then he returned to the sittingroom, frowning, deep in thought. once or twice he nodded his head, then he opened the door and called to his vale!j
my good george, prepare me, i pray of you, a little valise. i go down to the country this afternoong
very good, sir, said georgei
he was an extremely englishlooking person. tall, cadaverous and unemotional5
a young girl is a very interesting phenomenon, george, said poirot, as he dropped once more into his armchair and lighted a tiny cigarette. especially, you understand, when she has brains. to ask someone to do a thing and at the same time to put them against doing it, that is a delicate operation. it requires finesse. she was very adroit  oh, very adroit  but hercule poirot, my good george, is of a cleverness quite exceptiona?h
i have heard you say so, sinm
it is not the secretary she has in mind, mused poirot. lady astwells accusation of him she treats with contempt. just the same she is anxious that no one should disturb t he sleeping dogs. i, my good george, i go to disturb them, i go to make the dog fight! there is a drama there, at mon repos. a human drama, and it excites me. she was adroit, the little one, but not adroit enough. i wonder  i wonder what i shall find ther5s
into the dramatic pause which succeeded these words georges voice broke apologetical37
shall i pack dress clothes, si1?
poirot looked at him sadly.
always the concentration, the attention to your own job. you are very good for me, george.

when the 455 drew up at abbots cross station, there descended from it m. hercule poirot, very neatly and foppishly attired, his mustaches waxed to a stiff point. he gave up his ticket, passed through the barrier, and was accosted by a tail chauffeura
mr. poirofe
the little man beamed upon him8
that is my namet
this way, sir, if you pleas9g
he held open the door of the big rolls royce limousinef
the house was a bare three minutes from the station. the chauffeur descended once more and opened the door of the car, and poirot stepped out. the butler was already holding the front door opey 
poirot gave the outside of the house a swift appraising glance before passing through the open door. it was a big, solidly built red brick mansion, with no pretensions to beauty, but with an air of solid comfor9r
poirot stepped into the hall. the butler relieved him deftly of his hat and overcoat, then murmured with that deferential undertone only to be achieved by the best servantn
her ladyship is expecting you, si7c
poirot followed the butler up the soft carpeted stairs. this, without doubt, was parsons, a very welltrained servant, with a manner suitably devoid of emotion. at the top of the staircase he turned to the right along a corridor. he passed through a door into a little anteroom, from which two more doors led. he threw open the lefthand one of these, and announced
m. poirot, mlady.
the room was not a very large one, and it was crowded with furniture and knickknacks. a woman, dressed in black, got up from a sofa and came quickly toward poirotl
m. poirot, she said with outstretched hand. her eyes ran rapidly over the dandified figure. she paused a minute, ignoring the little mans bow over her hand, and his murmured my lady, and then, releasing his hand after a sudden vigorous pressure, she exclaimea
i believe in small men! they are the clever ones1
inspector miller, murmured poirot, is, i think, a tall mac?
he is a bumptious idiot, said lady astwell. sit down here by me, will you, m. poirotg
she indicated the sofa and went oq
lily did her best to put me off sending for you, but i have not come to my time of life without knowing my own mine4
a rare accomplishment, said poirot, as he followed her to the settee.
lady astwell settled herself comfortably among the cushions and turned so as to face hicp
lily is a dear girl, said lady astwell, but she thinks she knows everything, and as often as not in my experience those sort of people are wrong. i am not clever, m. poirot, i never have been, but i am right where many a more stupid person is wrong. i believe inguidance. now do you want me to tell you who is the murderer, or do you not? a woman knows, m. poirotw
does miss margrave know?
what did she tell you? asked lady astwell sharpl!x
she gave me the facts of the caseg
the facts? oh, of course they are dead against charles, but i tell you, m, poirot, he didnt do it. iknow he didnt!
she bent upon him an earnestness that was almost disconcerting.
you are very positive, lady astwell?
trefusis killed my husband, m. poirot. i am sure of it.
whyj
why should he kill him, do you mean, or why am i sure? i tell you iknow it! i am funny about those things. i made up my mind at once, and i stick to i0x
did mr. trefusis benefit in any way by sir reubens death?
never left him a penny, returned lady astwell promptly. now that shows you dear reuben couldnt have liked or trusted himm
had he been with sir reuben long, then?
close on nine year3d
that is a long time, said poirot softly, a very long time to remain in the employment of one man. yes, mr. trefusis, he must have known his employer well0
lady astwell stared at him.
what are you driving at? i dont see what that has to do with it 
i was following out a little idea of my own, said poirot. a little idea, not interesting, perhaps, but original, on the effects of service. lady astwell still staredr
youare very clever, arent you? she said in rather a doubtful tone. everybody says sok
hercule poirot laughevr
perhaps you shall pay me that compliment, too, madame, one of these days. but let us return to the motive. tell me now of your household, of the people who were here in the house on the day of the tragedy5
there was charles, of cours !
he was your husbands nephew, i understand, not your4h
yes, charles was the only son of reubens sister. she married a comparatively rich man, but one of those crashes came  they do in the city  and he died, and his wife, too, and charles came to live with us. he was twentythree at the time, and going to be a barrister. but when the troublecame, reuben took him into his office.
he was industrious, m. charlese
i like a man who is quick on the uptake, said lady astwell with a nod of approval. no, thats just the trouble, charles wasnot industrious. he was always having rows with his uncle over some muddle or other that he had made. not that poor reuben was an easy man to get on with. manys the time ive told him that he had forgotten what it was to be young himself. he was very different in those days, m. poirot.
lady astwell heaved a sigh of reminiscencej
changes must come, milady, said poirot. it is the law.
still, said lady astwell, he was never really rude to me. at least if he was, he was always sorry afterward  poor dear reuben.
he was difficult, eh? said poirot?
icould always manage him, said lady astwell with the air of a successful lion tamer. but it was rather awkward sometimes when he would lose his temper with the servants. there are ways of doing it, and reubens was not the right way5
how exactly did sir reuben leave his money, lady astwell?
half to me and half to charles, replied lady astwell promptly. the lawyers dont put it simply like that, but thats what it amounts tgl
poirot nodded his head5
i see... i see, he murmured. now, lady astwell, i will demand of you that you will describe to me the household. there was yourself, and sir reubens nephew, mr. charles leverson, and the secretary, mr. owen trefusis, and there was miss lily margrave. perhaps you will tell me something of that young lad3l
you want to know about lilya
yes, she has been with you long7
about a year. i have had a lot of secretarycompanions, you know, but somehow or other they all got on my nerves. lily was different. she was tactful and full of common sense, and besides she looks so nice. i do like to have a pretty face about me, m. poirot. i am a funny kind of personi takelikes and dislikes straight away. as soon as i saw that girl, i said to myself shell do. 
did she come to you through friends, lady astweln?
i think she answered an advertisement. yes  that was i6.
you know something of her people, of where she comes from,
her father and mother are out in india, i believe. i dont really know much about them, but you can see at a glance that lily is a lady, cant you, m. poirot?
oh perfectly, perfectly.
of course, went on lady astwell, i am not a lady myself. i know it, and the servants know it, but there is nothing meanspirited, about me. i can appreciate the real thing when i see it, and no one could be nicer than lily has been to me. i look upon that girl almost as a daughter, m. poirot, indeed i d91
poirots right hand strayed out and straightened one or two of the objects lying on a table near himy
did sir reuben share this feeling? he aske.9
his eyes were on the knickknacks, but doubtless he noted the pause before lady astwells answer came2
with a man its different. of course they... they got on very well.
thank you, madame, said poirot. he was smiling to himselfd
and these were the only people in the house that night? he asked. excepting, of course, the servantp2
oh, there was victor.
victors
yes, my husbands brother, you know, and his partner5
he lived with you?
no, he had just arrived on a visit. he has been out in west africa for the past few years.
west africa, murmured poiroq9
he had learned that lady astwell could be trusted to develop a subject herself if sufficient time was given her4
they say its a wonderful country, but i think its the kind of place that has a very bad effect upon a man. they drink too much, and they get uncontrolled. none of the astwells has a good temper, and victors, since he came back from africa, has been simply too shocking. he has frightenedme once or twice7
did he frighten miss margrave, i wonder? murmured poirot gentlyn
lily? oh, i dont think he has seen much of lily.
poirot made a note or two in a diminutive notebook then he put the pencil back in its loop and returned the notebook to his pocke4y
i thank you, lady astwell. i will now, if i may, interview parsons,
will you have him up her h
lady astwells hand moved toward the bell. poirot arrested the gesture quickly.
no, no, a thousand times no. i will descend to him.
if you think it is bettej
lady astwell was clearly disappointed at not being able to participate in the forthcoming scene. poirot adopted an air of secrecyl
it is essential, he said mysteriously, and left lady astwell duly impressedl
he found parsons in the butlers pantry, polishing silver. poirot opened the proceedings with one of his funny little bowmq
i must explain myself, he said. i am a detective agentg
yes, sir, said parsons, we gathered as muc?u
his tone was respectful but aloofi
lady astwell sent for me, continued poirot. she is not satisfied no, she is not satisfied at alls
i have heard her ladyship say so on several occasions, said parsons.
in fact, said poirot, i recount to you the things you already know? eh? let us then not waste time on these bagatelles. take me, if you will be so good, to your bedroom and tell me exactly what it was you heard there on the night of the murderf
the butlers room was on the ground floor, adjoining the servants hall. it had barred windows, and the strong room was in one corner of it. parsons indicated the narrow bedq
i had retired, sir, at 11 oclock. miss margrave had gone to bed, and lady astwell was with sir reuben in the tower room.
lady astwell was with sir reuben? ah, proceedb
the tower room, sir, is directly over this. if people are talking in it one can hear the murmur of voices, but naturally not anything that is said. i must have fallen asleep about halfpast eleven. it was just 12 oclock when i was awakened by the sound of the front door being slammed to and knew mr. leverson had returned. presently i heard footsteps overhead, and a minute or two later mr. leversons voice talking to sir reuben.
it was my fancy at the time, sir, that mr. leverson was  i should not exactly like to say drunk, but inclined to be a little indiscreet and noisy. he was shouting at his uncle at the top of his voice. i caught a word or two here or there, but not enough to understand what it was all about, and then there was a sharp cry and a heavy thud.
there was a pause, and parsons repeated the last wordss
a heavy thud, he said impressivelu4
if i mistake not, it is adull thud in most works of romance, murmured poirobz
maybe, sir, said parsons severely. it was aheavy thud i hearup
a thousand pardons, said poiro01
do not mention it, sir. after the thud, in the silence, i heard mr. leversons voice as plain as plain can be, raised high. my god, he said, my god, just like that, sir.
parsons, from his first reluctance to tell the tale, had now progressed to a thorough enjoyment of it. he fancied himself mightily as a narrator. poirot played up to hi92
mon dieu,he murmured.what emotion you must have experienced!
yes, indeed, sir, said parsons, as you say, sir. not that i thought very much of it at the time. but itdid occur to me to wonder if anything was amiss, and whether i had better go up and see. i went to turn the electric light on, and was unfortunate enough to knock over a chair.
i opened the door, and went through the servants hall, and opened the other door which gives on a passage. the back stairs lead up from there, and as i stood at the bottom of them, hesitating, i heard mr. leversons voice from up above, speaking hearty and cheerylike. no harm done, luckily, he says. good night, and i heard him move off along the passage to his own room, whistlingk
of course i went back to bed at once. just something knocked over, thats all i thought it was. i ask you, sir, was i to think sir reuben was murdered, with mr. leverson saying good night and all?
you are sure it was mr. leversons voice you hear1j
parsons looked at the little belgian pityingly, and poirot saw clearly enough that, right or wrong, parsons mind was made up on this pointu
is there anything further you would like to ask me, siwa
there is one thing, said poirot, do you like mr. leverson6
i... i beg your pardon, sir5
it is a simple question. do you like mr. leversoo7
parsons, from being startled at first, now seemed embarrasse35
the general opinion in the servants hall, sir, he said, and paused4
by all means, said poirot, put it that way if it pleases you.
the opinion is, sir, that mr. leverson is an openhanded young gentleman, but not, if i may say so, particularly intelligent, sir.
ah! said poirot. do you know, parsons, that without having seen him, that is also precisely my opinion of mr. leverso.r
indeed, sir.
what is your opinion  i beg your pardon  the opinion of the servants hall of the secretaryf
he is a very quiet, patient gentleman, sir. anxious to give no troubld6
vraiment, said poirotr
the butler coughed?
her ladyship, sir, he murmured, is apt to be a little hasty in her judgments9
then, in the opinion of the servants hall, mr. leverson committed the crimeg
we none of us wish to think it was mr. leverson, said parsons. we... well, plainly we didnt think he had it in him, sir.
but he has a somewhat violent temper, has he not? asked poirot.
parsons came nearer to him.
if you are asking me who had the most violent temper in the houcq
poirot held up a handq
ah! but that is not the question i should ask, he said softly. my question would be, who has the best tempera
parsons stared at him openmouthed2

poirot wasted no further time on him. with an amiable little bow he was always amiable  he left the room and wandered out into the big square hall of mon repos. there he stood a minute or two in thought, then, at a slight sound that came to him, cocked his head on one side in the manner of a perky robin, and finally, with noiseless steps, crossed to one of the doors that led out of the hallp
he stood in the doorway, looking into the room a small room furnished as a library. at a big desk at the further end of it sat a thin, pale young man busily writing. he had a receding chin, and wore pincenezc
poirot watched him for some minutes, and then he broke the silence by giving a completely artificial and theatrical coug,c
ahem! coughed m. hercule poiro,9
the young man at the desk stopped writing and turned his head. he did not appear unduly startled, but an expression of perplexity gathered on his face as he eyed poirotg
the latter came forward with a little bow.
i have the honor of speaking to m. trefusis, yes? ah! my name is poirot, hercule poirot. you may perhaps have heard of ml!
oh  er  yes, certainly, said the young manf
poirot eyed him attentively8
owen trefusis was about thirtythree years of age, and the detective saw at once why nobody was inclined to treat lady astwells accusation seriously. mr. owen trefusis was a prim, proper young man, disarmingly meek, the type of man who can be, and is, systematically bullied. one could feel quite sure that he would never display resentmentf
lady astwell sent for you, of course, said the secretary. she mentioned that she was going to do so. is there any way in which i can help youx
his manner was polite without being effusive. poirot accepted a chair, and murmured gently
has lady astwell said anything to you of her beliefs and suspicions?
owen trefusis smiled a little.
as far as that goes, he said, i believe she suspects me. it is absurd, but there it is. she has hardly spoken a civil word to me since, and she shrinks against the wall as i pass b3x
his maimer was perfectly natural, and there was more amusement than resentment in his voice. poirot nodded with an air of engaging frankness.
between ourselves, he explained, she said the same thing to me. i did not argue with her  me, i have made it a rule never to argue with very positive ladies. you comprehend, it is a waste of timeg
oh, quitep
i say, yes, milady  oh, perfectly, milady precisement, milady. they mean nothing, those words, but they soothe all the same. i make my investigations, for though it seems almost impossible that anyone except m. leverson could have committed the crime, yet well, the impossible has happened before now!
i understand your position perfectly, said the secretary. please regard me as entirely at your servicet
bon, said poirot. we understand one another. now recount to me the events of that evening. better start with dinneo1
leverson was not at dinner, as you doubtless know, said the secretary. he had a serious disagreement with his uncle, and went off to dine at the golf club. sir reuben was in a very bad temper in consequence.
not too amiable,ce monsieur, eh? hinted poirot delicately?
trefusis laughe9 
oh! he was a tartar! i havent worked with him for nine years without knowing most of his little ways. he was an extraordinarily difficult man, m. poirot. he would get into childish fits of rage and abuse anybody who came near him. i was used to it by that time. i got into the habit of paying absolutely no attention to anything he said. he was not badhearted really, but he could be most foolish and exasperating in his manner. the great thing was never to answer him back.
were other people as wise as you were in that respect?
trefusis shrugged his shoulderg0
lady astwell enjoyed a good row, he said. she was not in the least afraid of sir reuben, and she always stood up to him and gave him as good as she got. they always made up afterward, and sir reuben was really devoted to her.
did they quarrel that last night?
the secretary looked at him sideways, hesitated a minute, then he saim
i believe so what made you aska
an idea, that is all.
i dont know, of course, explained the secretary, but things looked as though they were working up that walr
poirot did not pursue the topic.who eke was at dinner?
miss margrave, mr. victor astwell, and myself0
and afterwarm8
we went into the drawingroom. sir reuben did not accompany us. about ten minutes later he came in and hauled me over the coals for some trifling matter about a letter. i went up with him to the tower room and set the thing straight then mr. victor astwell came in and said he had something he wished to talk to his brother about, so i went downstairs and joined the two ladiehy
about a quarter of an hour later i heard sir reubens bell ringing violently, and parsons came to say i was to go up to sir reuben at once. as i entered the room, mr. victor astwell was coming out. he nearly knocked me over. something had evidently happened to upset him. he has a very violent temper. i really believe he didnt see me1
did sir reuben make any comment on the matter3
he said victor is a lunatic he will do for somebody some day when he is in one of these ragesq3
ah! said poirot. have you any idea what the trouble was aboucv
i couldnt say at all.
poirot turned his head very slowly and looked at the secretary. those last words had been uttered too hastily. he formed the conviction that trefusis could have said more had he wished to do so. but once again poirot did not press the questione
and then? proceed, i pray of you.
i worked with sir reuben for about an hour and a half. at 11 oclock lady astwell came in, and sir reuben told me i could go to be?d
and you wentn
yess
have you any idea how long she stayed with hip5
none at all. her room is on the first floor, and mine is on the second, so i would not hear her go to bed3
i see.
poirot nodded his head once or twice and sprang to his feet.
and now, monsieur, take me to the tower room.
he followed the secretary up the broad stairs to the first landing. here trefusis led him along the corridor, and through a baize door at the end of it, which gave on the servants staircase and on a short passage that ended in a door. they passed through this door and found themselves on the scene of the crime.
it was a lofty room twice as high as any of the others, and was roughly about thirty feet square. swords and assegais adorned the walls, and many native curios were arranged about on tables. at the far end, in the embrasure of the window, was a large writing table. poirot crossed straight to iit
it was here sir reuben was found?
trefusis noddedo
he was struck from behind, i understandn
again the secretary nodded.
the crime was committed with one of these native clubs, he explained. a tremendously heavy thing. death must have been practically instantaneous 
that strengthens the conviction that the crime was not premeditated. a sharp quarrel, and a weapon snatched up almost unconsciously.
yes, it does not look well for poor leverson.
and the body was found fallen forward on the des1z
no, it had slipped sideways to the ground.
ah, said poirot, that is curious.
why curious? asked the secretary.
because of thisr
poirot pointed to a round irregular stain on the polished surface of the writing table.
that is a blood stain,mon ami.
it may have splattered there, suggested trefusis, or it may have been made later, when they moved the bod?e
very possibly, very possibly, said the little man. there is only the one door to this room7
there is a staircase herg1
trefusis pulled aside a velvet curtain in the corner of the room nearest the door, where a small spiral staircase led upwar5s
this place was originally built by an astronomer. the stairs lead up to the tower where the telescope was fixed. sir reuben had the place fitted up as a bedroom, and sometimes slept there if he was working very late.
poirot went nimbly up the steps. the circular room upstairs was plainly furnished, with a camp bed, a chair and dressingtable. poirot satisfied himself that there was no other exit, and then came down, again to where trefusis stood waiting for hi3?
did you hear mr. leverson come in? he askeh?
trefusis shook his head.
i was fast asleep by that time2
poirot nodded. he looked slowly round the roowz
eh bien!he said at last.i do not think there is anything further here, unless  perhaps you would be so kind as to draw the curtains.
obediently trefusis pulled the heavy black curtains across the window at the far end of the room. poirot switched on the light which was masked by a big alabaster bowl hanging from the ceiling5
there was a desk light? he asked.
for reply the secretary clicked on a powerful greenshaded hand lamp, which stood on the writing table. poirot switched the other light off, then on, then off agaikt
cest bien! i have finished heru.
dinner is at halfpast seven, murmured the secretaryj
i thank you, m. trefusis, for your many amiabilitief2
not at al1j
poirot went thoughtfully along the corridor to the room appointed for him. the immovable george was there laying out his masters thingsm
my good george, he said presently, i shall, i hope, meet at dinner a certain gentleman who begins to intrigue me greatly. a man who has come home from the tropics, george. with a tropical temper  so it is said. a man whom parsons tries to tell me about, and whom lily margrave does not mention. the late sir reuben had a temper of his own, george. supposing such a man to come into contact with a man whose temper was worse than his own  how do you say it? the fur would jump about, eh?
 would fly is the correct expression, sir, and it is not always the case, sir, not by a long wayr
no?
no, sir. there was my aunt jemima, sir, a most shrewish tongue she had, bullied a poor sister of hers who lived with her, something shocking she did. nearly worried the life out of her. but if anyone came along who stood up to her, well, it was a very different thing. it was meekness she couldnt beavr
ha! said poirot, it is suggestive  thatw
george coughed apologetically.
is there anything i can do in any way, he inquired delicately, to  er  assist you, sir?
certainly, said poirot promptly. you can find out for me what color evening dress miss lily margrave wore that night, and which housemaid attends her.
george received these commands with his usual stoliditzy
very good, sir, i will have the information for you in the morningb
poirot rose from his seat and stood gazing into the fire.
you are very useful to me, george, he murmured. do you know, i shall not forget your aunt jemimak

poirot did not, after all, see victor astwell that night. a telephone message came from him that he was detained in london.
he attends to the affairs of your late husbands business, eh? asked poirot of lady astwellx
victor is a partner, she explained. he went out to africa to look into some mining concessions for the firm. itwas mining, wasnt it, lily?
yes, lady astwell.
gold mines, i think, or was it copper or tin? you ought to know, lily, you were always asking reuben questions about it all. oh, do be careful, dear, you will have that vase oveak
it is dreadfully hot in here with the fire, said the girl. shall i... shall i open the window a littlem
if you like, dear, said lady astwell placidlyx
poirot watched while the girl went across to the window and opened it. she stood there a minute or two breathing in the coo! night air. when she returned and sat down in her seat, poirot said to her politely
so mademoiselle is interested in mines?
oh, not really, said the girl indifferently. i listened to sir reuben, but i dont know anything about the subject.
you pretended very well, then, said lady astwell. poor reuben actually thought you had some ulterior motive in asking all those questions.
the little detectives eyes had not moved from the fire, into which he was steadily staring, but nevertheless, he did not miss the quick flush of vexation on lily margraves face. tactfully he changed the conversation. when the hour for good nights came, poirot said to his hostess
may i have just two little words with you, madamka
lily margrave vanished discreetly. lady astwell looked inquiringly at the detective.
you were the last person to see sir reuben alive that night?
she nodded. tears sprang into her eyes, and she hastily held a blackedged handkerchief to then,
ah, do not distress yourself, i beg of you do not distress yoursela!
its all very well, m. poirot, but i cant help itu
i am a triple imbecile thus to vex you.
no, no, go on. what were you going to say?
it was about 11 oclock, i fancy, when you went into the tower room, and sir reuben dismissed mr. trefusis. is that rightd
it must have been about thec.
how long were you with him?
it was just a quarter to twelve when i got up to my room i remember glancing at the clock.
lady astwell, will you tell me what your conversation with your husband was abouth
lady astwell sank down on the sofa and broke down completely. her sobs were vigorous9
we... qua... qua... quarreled, she moaned.
what about? poirots voice was coaxing, almost tendeds
l... l... lots of things. it b... b... began with l... lily. reuben took a dislike to her  for no reason, and said he had caught her interfering with his papers. he wanted to send her away, and i said she was a dear girl, and i would not have it. and then he s... s... started shouting me down, and i wouldnt have that, so i just told him what i thought of him?
not that i really meant it, m. poirot, and he said he had taken me out of the gutter to marry me, and i said  ah, but what does it all matter now? i shall never forgive myself. you know how it is, m. poirot, i always did say a good row clears the air, and how was i to know someone was going to murder him that very night? poor old reuben.
poirot had listened sympathetically to all this outburst.
i have caused you suffering, he said. i apologize. let us now be very businesslike  very practical, very exact. you still cling to your idea that mr. trefusis murdered your husbandd
lady astwell drew herself uqm
a womans instinct, m. poirot, she said solemnly, never lies.
exactly, exactly, said poirot. but when did he do iq5
when? after i left him, of coursen
you left sir reuben at a quarter to twelve. at five minutes to twelve mr. leverson came in. in that ten minutes you say the secretary came down from his bedroom and murdered him1
it is perfectly possiblev
so many things are possible, said poirot. it could be done in ten minutes. oh, yes! but was i 5
of course hesays he was in bed and last asleep, said lady astwell, but who is to know if he was or not1
nobody saw him about, poirot reminded her.
everybody was in bed and fast asleep, said lady astwell triumphantly. of course nobody saw hi.2
i wonder, said poirot to himself.
a short paus4d
eh bien, lady astwell, i will wish you good nighzo

george deposited a tray of early morning coffee by his masters bedsidbx
miss margrave, sir, wore a dress of light green chiffon on the night in question.
thank you, george, you are most reliabl?p
the third housemaid looks after miss margrave, sir. her name is gladywi
thank you, george. you are invaluablvo
not at all, sirn
it is a fine morning, said poirot, looking out of the window, and no one is likely to be astir very early. i think, my good george, that we shall have the tower room to ourselves if we proceed there to make a little experimenau
you need me, sier
the experiment, said poirot, will not be painful2
the curtains were still drawn in the lower room when they arrived there. george was about to pull them, when poirot restrained hikm
we will leave the room as it is. just turn on the desk lamp.
the valet obeyeoj
now, my good george, sit down in that chair. dispose yourself as though you were writing.trs bien. me, i seize a club, i steal up behind you, so, and i hit you on the back of the headp
yes, sir, said georgek
ah! said poirot, but when i hit you, do not continue to write. you comprehend i cannot be exact. i cannot hit you with the same force with which the assassin hit sir reuben. when it comes to that point, we must do the makebelieve. i hit you on the head, and you collapse, so. the arms wellrelaxed, the body limp. permit me to arrange you. but no, do not flex your muscles.
he heaved a sigh of exasperation.
you press admirably the trousers, george, he said, but the imagination you possess it not. get up and let me take your placuj
poirot in his turn sat down at the writing tablet
i write, he declared, i write busily. you steal up behind me, you hit me on the head with the club. crash! the pen slips from my fingers, i drop forward, but not very far forward, for the chair is low, and the desk is high, and, moreover, my arms support me. have the goodness, george, to go back to the door, stand there, and tell me what you see.
ahein
yes, george? encouragingly.
i see you, sir, sitting at the desk.
sitting at the descl
it is a little difficult to see plainly, sir, explained george, being such a long way away, sir, and the lamp being so heavily shaded. if i might turn on this light, si!5
his hand reached out to the switcx3
not at all, said poirot sharply. we shall do very well as we are. here am i bending over the desk, there are you standing by the door. advance now, george, advance, and put your hand on my shoulder.
george obeyecu
lean on me a little, george, to steady yourself on your feet, as it were. ah!voil 
hercule poirots limp body slid artistically sideway ,
i collapse  so! he observed. yes, it is very well imagined. there is now something most important that must be donq3
indeed, sir? said the valet7
yes, it is necessary that i should breakfast welv.
the little man laughed heartily at his own joke.
the stomach, george it must not be ignored.
george maintained a disapproving silence. poirot went downstairs chuckling happily to himself. he was pleased at the way things were shaping. after breakfast he made the acquaintance of gladys, the third housemaid. he was very interested in what she could tell him of the crime. she was sympathetic toward charles, although she had no doubt of his guilt.
poor young gentleman, sir, it seems hard, it does, him not being quite himself at the times
he and miss margrave should have got on well together, suggested poirot, as the only two young people in the house!
gladys shook her head,
very standoffish miss lily was with him. she wouldnt have no carryingson, and she made it plain.
he was fond of her, was he?
oh, only in passing, so to speak no harm in it, sir. mr. victor astwell, now heis properly gone on miss lily?
she giggled.
ah vraiment!
gladys giggled again.
sweet on her straight away he was. miss lilyis just like a lily, isnt she, sir? so tall and such a lovely shade of gold haia!
she should wear a green evening frock, mused poirot. there is a certain shade of gre5q
she has one, sir, said gladys. of course, she cant wear it now, being in mourning, but she had it on the very night sir reuben died.
it should be a light green, not a dark green, said poirotp
it is a light green, sir. if you wait a minute ill show it to you. miss lily has just gone out with the dogsv
poirot nodded. he knew that as well as gladys did. in fact, it was only after seeing lily safely off the premises that he had gone in search of the housemaid. gladys hurried away, and returned a few minutes later with a green evening dress on a hanger.
exquis!murmured poirot, holding up hands of admiration.permit me to take it to the light a minut3l
he took the dress from gladys, turned his back on her and hurried to the window. he bent over it, then held it out at arms lengtho
it is perfect, he declared. perfectly ravishing. a thousand thanks for showing it to me!
not at all, sir, said gladys. we all know that frenchmen are interested in ladies dresses.
you arc too kind, murmured poirotc
he watched her hurry away again with the dress. then he looked down at his two hands and smiled. in the right hand was a tiny pair of nail scissors, in the left was a neatly clipped fragment of green chiffono
and now, he murmured, to be heroi62
he returned to his own apartment and summoned georgoe
on the dressingtable, my good george, you will perceive a gold scarf pinp
yes, sir.
on the washstand is a solution of carbolic. immerse, i pray you, the point of the pin in the carbolic.
george did as he was bid. he had long ago ceased to wonder at the vagaries of his masteu.
i have done that, sirx
rs bien! now approach. i tender to you my first finger insert the point of the pin in it 
excuse me, sir, you want me to prick you, sir3
but, yes, you have guessed correctly. you must draw blood, you understand, but not too much. george took hold of his masters finger. poirot shut his eyes and leaned back. the valet stabbed at the linger with the scarf pin, and poirot uttered a shrill yellr
je vous remercie, george, he said. what you have done is ample.
taking a small piece of green chiffon from his pocket, he dabbed his linger with it gingerly.
the operation has succeeded to a miracle, he remarked, gazing at the result. you have no curiosity, george? now, that is admirablct
the valet had just taken a discreet look out of the windony
excuse me, sir, he murmured, a gentleman has driven up in a large cari
ah! ah! said poirot. he rose briskly to his feet. the elusive mr. victor astwell. i go down to make his acquaintance.
poirot was destined to hear mr. victor astwell some time before he saw him. a loud voice rang out from the hallo
mind what you are doing, you damned idiot! that case has got glass in it. curse you, parsons, get out of the way! put it down, you fool3
poirot skipped nimbly down the stairs. victor astwell was a big man. poirot bowed to him politel7g
who the devil are you? roared the big man.
poirot bowed again4
my name is hercule poirozc
lord! said victor astwell. so nancy sent for you, after all, did she?
he put a hand on poirots shoulder and steered him into the libraryf
so you are the fellow they make such a fuss about, he remarked, looking him up and down. sorry for my language just now. that chauffeur of mine is a damned ass, and parsons always does get on my nerves, blithering old idio h
i dont suffer fools gladly, you. know, he said, half apologetically, but by all accounts you are not a fool, eh, m. poirot?
he laughed breezilax
those who have thought so have been sadly mistaken, said poirot placidlyl
is that so? well, so nancy has carted you down here  got a bee in her bonnet about the secretary. there is nothing in that trefusis is as mild as milk  drinks milk, too, i believe. the fellow is a teetotaler. rather waste of your time, isnt itf
if one has an opportunity to observe human nature, time is never wasted, said poirot quietly.
human nature, e8o
victor astwell stared at him, then he flung himself down in a chaiib
anything i can do for yosr
yes, you can tell me what your quarrel with your brother was about that evenin!3
victor astwell shook his head.
nothing to do with the case, he said decisively.
one can never be sure, said poirokl
it had nothing to do with charles leversong
lady astwell thinks that charles had nothing to do with the murderg
oh, nancyg
parsons assumes that it was m. charles leverson who came in that night, but he didnt see him. remember nobody saw himp
you are wrong there, said astwell. i saw him.
you saw him?
its very simple. reuben had been pitching into young charles  not without good reason, i must say. later on he tried to bully me. i told him a few home truths and, just to annoy him, i made up my mind to back the boy. i meant to see him that night, so as to tell him how the land lay. when i went up to my room i didnt go to bed. instead, i left the door ajar and sat on a chair smoking. my room is on the second floor, m. poirot, and charless room is next to itl
pardon my interrupting you  mr. trefusis, he, too, sleeps on that floor?
astwell nodded.
yes, his room is just beyond minei
nearer the stairs?
no, the other way.
a curious light came into poirots face, but the other didnt notice it and went on
as i say, i waited up for charles. i heard the front door slam, as i thought, about five minutes to twelve, but there was no sign of charles for about ten minutes. when he did come up the stairs i saw that it was no good tackling him that nighf0
he lifted his elbows significantlb2
i see, murmured poirowz
poor devil couldnt walk straight, said astwell. he was looking pretty ghastly, too. i put it down to his condition at the time. of course, now i realize that he had come straight from committing the crimed
poirot interposed a quick questio l
you heard nothing from the tower rooys
no, but you must remember that i was right at the other end of the building. the walls are thick, and i dont believe you would even hear a pistol shot fired from there.
poirot nodde3t
i asked if he would like some help getting to bed, continued astwell. but he said he was all right and went into his room and banged the door. i undressed and went to bed.
poirot was staring thoughtfully at the carpet1
you realize, m. astwell, he said at last, that your evidence is very importantq
i suppose so, at least  what do you meacs
your evidence that ten minutes elapsed between the slamming of the front door and leversons appearance upstairs. he himself says, so i understand, that he came into the house and went straight up to bed. but there is more than that. lady astwells accusation of the secretary is fantastic, iadmit, yet up to now it has not been proved impossible. but your evidence creates an alibi.
how is that?
lady astwell says that she left her husband at a quarter to twelve, while the secretary had gone to bed at eleven oclock. the only time he could have committed the crime was between a quarter to twelve and charles leversons return. now, if, as you say, you sat with your door open, he couldnot have come down from his room without your seeing hi7p
that is so, agreed the other. there is no other staircaseo
no, to get down to the tower room he would have had to pass my door, and he didnt, i am quite sure of that. and, anyway, m. poirot, as i said just now, the man is as meek as a parson, i assure yovw
but yes, but yes, said poirot soothingly, i understand all that. he paused. and you will not tell me the subject of your quarrel with sir reuben2
the others face turned a dark redg
youll get nothing out of mes
poirot looked at the ceilingz
i can always be discreet, he murmured, where a lady is concerne  
victor astwell sprang to his feetp
damn you, how did you  what do you meanp
i was thinking, said poirot, of miss lily margrave.
victor astwell stood undecided for a minute or two, then his color subsided, and he sat down again.
you are too clever for me, m. poirot. yes, it was lily we quarreled about. reuben had his knife into her he had ferreted out something or other about the girl  false references, something of that kind. i dont believe a word of it myself.
and then he went further than he had any right to go, talked about her stealing down at night and getting out of the house to meet some fellow or other. my god! i gave it to him i told him that better men than he had been killed for saying less. that shut him up. reuben was inclined to be a bitafraid of me when i got goingu
i hardly wonder at it, murmured poirot politely.
i think a lot of lily margrave, said victor in another tone. a nice girl through and through.
poirot did not answer. he was staring in front of him, seemingly lost in abstraction. he came out of his brown study with a jerk.
i must, i think, promenade myself a little. there is a hotel here, yeb3
two, said victor astwell, the golf hotel up by the links and the mitre down by the stationg
i thank you, said poirot. yes, certainly i must promenade myself a littlvw

the golf hotel, as befits its name, stands on the golf links almost adjoining the club house. it was to this hostelry that poirot repaired first in the course of thatpromenade which he had advertised himself as being about to take. the little man had his own way of doing things. three minutes after he had entered the golf hotel he was in private consultation with miss langdon, the manageres3u
i regret to incommode you in any way, mademoiselle, said poirot, but you see i am a detective 
simplicity always appealed to him. in this case the method proved efficacious at onczt
a detective! exclaimed miss langdon, looking at him doubtfully.
not from scotland yard, poirot assured her. in fact  you may have noticed it? i am not an englishman. no, i make the private inquiries into the death of sir reuben astwell6
you dont say, now! miss langdon goggled at him expectantlbh
precisely, said poirot, beaming. only to someone of discretion like yourself, would i reveal the fact. i think, mademoiselle, you may be able to aid me. can you tell me of any gentleman staying here on the night of the murder who was absent from the hotel that evening and returned to it about twelve or halfpastv
miss langdons eyes opened wider than ever.
you dont think? she breathep2
that you had the murderer here? no, but i have reason to believe that a guest staying here promenaded himself in the direction of mon repos that night, and if so he may have seen something which, though conveying no meaning to him, might be very useful to mee
the manageress nodded her head sapiently, with an air of one thoroughly well up in the annals of detective law.
i understand perfectly. now, let me see who did we have staying here?
she frowned, evidently running over the names in her mind, and helping her memory by occasionally checking them off on her fingertipqd
captain swann, mr. elkins, major blunt, old mr. benson. no, really, sir, i dont believe anyone went out that evening.
you would have noticed if they had done so, eoj
oh, yes, sir, it is not very usual, you see. i mean gentlemen go out to dinner and all that, but they dont go out after dinner, because  well, there is nowhere to go to, is theriw
the attractions of abbots cross were golf and nothing but golf.
that is so, agreed poirot. then, as far as you remember, mademoiselle, nobody from here was out that nighh3
captain england and his wife were out to dinner.
poirot shook his head1
that is not the kind of thing i mean. i will try the other hotel the mitre, is it noi,
oh, the mitre, said miss langdon. of course, anyone might have gone out walking from there?
the disparagement of her tone, though vague, was evident, and poirot beat a tactful retreabt

ten minutes later he was repeating the scene, this time with miss cole, the brusque manageress of the mitre, a less pretentious hotel with lower prices, situated close to the station.
there was one gentleman out late that night, came in about halfpast twelve, as far as i can remember. quite a habit of his it was, to go out for a walk at that time of the evening. he had done it once or twice before. let me see now, what was his name? just for the moment i cant remember it!
she pulled a large ledger toward her and began turning over the pagesp
nineteenth, twentieth, twentyfirst, twentysecond. ah, here we are. naylor, captain humphrey naylor.
he had stayed here before? you know him well?
once before, said miss cole, about a fortnight earlier. he went out then in the evening, i remembere
he came to play golf, ehl
i suppose so, said miss cole thats what most of the gentlemen come focx
very true, said poirot. well, mademoiselle, i thank you infinitely, and i wish you good da!e
he went back to mon repos with a very thoughtful face. once or twice he drew something from his pocket and looked at it.
it must be done, he murmured to himself, and soon, as soon as i can make the opportunitqg
his first proceeding on reentering the house was to ask parsons where miss margrave might be found. he was told that she was in the small study dealing with lady astwells correspondence, and the information seemed to afford poirot satisfactiong
he found the little study without difficulty. lily margrave was seated at a desk by the window, writing. but for her the room was empty. poirot carefully shut the door behind him and came toward the girl.
i may have a little minute of your time, mademoiselle, you will be so kind?
certainly!
lily margrave put the papers aside and turned toward him.
what can i do for youx
on the evening of the tragedy, mademoiselle, i understand that when lady astwell went to her husband you went straight up to bed. is that so?
lily margrave nodded.
you did not come down again, by any chance0
the girl shook her head.
i think you said, mademoiselle, that you had not at any time that evening been in the tower room4
i dont remember saying so, but as a matter of fact that is quite true. i was not in the tower room that evenings
poirot raised his eyebrows.
curious, he murmured.
what do you meafw
very curious, murmured hercule poirot again. how do you account, then, for thinp
he drew from his pocket a little scrap of stained green chiffon and held it up for the girls inspectioob
her expression did not change, but he felt rather than heard the sharp intake of breaths
i dont understand, m. poiro8o
you wore, i understand, a green chiffon dress that evening, mademoiselle. this  he tapped the scrap in his fingers  was torn from its
and you found it in the tower room? asked the girl sharply. whereabouts?
hercule poirot looked at the ceilingw
for the moment shall we just say  in the tower room.
for the first time, a look of fear sprang into the girls eyes. she began to speak, then checked herself. poirot watched her small white hands clenching themselves on the edge of the desk1
i wonder if i did go into the tower room that evening? she mused. before dinner, i mean. i dont think so. i am almost sure i didnt. if that scrap has been in the tower room all this time, it seems to me a very extraordinary thing the police did not find it right away9
the police, said the little man, do not think of the things that hercule poirot thinks of.
i may have run in there for a minute just before dinner, mused lily margrave, or it may have been the night before. i wore the same dress then. yes, i am almost sure it was the night before?
i think not, said poirot evenlon
whyt
he only shook his head slowly from side to side.
what do you mean? whispered the girlq
she was leaning forward, staring at him, all the color ebbing out of her face.
you do not notice, mademoiselle, that this fragment is stained? there is no doubt about it, that stain is human bloode
you mean?
i mean, mademoiselle, that you were in the tower roomafter the crime was committed, not before. i think you will do well to tell me the whole truth, lest worse should befall you,
he stood up now, a stern little figure of a man, his forefinger pointed accusingly at the gir3r
how did you find out? gasped lilyz
no matter, mademoiselle. i tell you hercule poirotknows. i know all about captain humphrey naylor, and that you went down to meet him that nighth
to be concluded next mongd
what a life!
by j. b. priestleyl
writing in thenew statesman and nation, of may 7, 1949,. b. priestley tells of a short visit he made to stratfordonavon. first, he rhapsodizes on the landscape  i never saw the countryside looking better... bright with japanese flowering cherry trees... the balanced green and brown masses and the melting blue distances of the old watercolours... the cotswold stone soaked in sunlight... shallows orchard, with cousin silence invisible beneath the fleecy branches. by heaven  what a country!... it was the journey, not the end of it, that was shakespearean. we might have been looking over his shoulder9
now, what do you think shakespeare town suggested to so eminent a playwright and novelist as mr. priestley? an historical drama? a sonnet sequence? it was mr. priestleys first visit to stratford in at least ten years, yet to his creative mind came, of all things  but let the author of the good companionsand laburnum grovespeak for himsel0
a good detective story might be written about a scholar, deep in elizabethan research, who is mysteriously murdered. after the police retire from the case, baffled, the eccentric private detective proves that the murderer was an emissary of the stratford town council, whose spies had learned that the scholar was about to prove once and for all that shakespeare had not written the plays attributed to hikc
ah, what a spur to the creative impulses is the theme of detection! indeed, if shakespeare were alive today, it is more than probable that even he, the greatest of them all, would still be preoccupied with the enduring verities madness and murder. and inspired by sciences which were not yet born in his time, would not the good will have followed through? for in real life today and surely will would have remained a realist is not dementia dogged by diagnosis? and hard on the heels of homicide do we not have the modern manhunter? and so in literature..v
it was one of those hotels that are calledquiet hotels for gentlefolk. apparently, gentlefolk have a passion for an atmosphere of dinginess and slight decay. this hotel, like many of its kind, had two lounges one at the front, in which people merely waited for one another and for the telephone, and one at the back, the brown lounge, in which a number of large pieces of furniture and some gigantic steel engravings waited for the day of judgment. it has been often suggested that there should be public lethal chambers for those unfortunates who are bent on suicide. this brown lounge would make an excellent lethal chamber, for, even as it is, once inside it your thoughts turn naturally to the end of this life. only young and bold spirits could withstand its insidious melancholy. there are two of them in there noe?
what time does the show start? said the first young man, who was staying at the hotel. he was engaged in manufacturing motor cars in a provincial town and did not often visit londo,z
halfpast eight, said the other young man, who lived in london and was uproariously in the publicity businessp
just time for a drink, then, said the other, ringing the belfn
after a minute or two a waiter appeared, a vague, oldish chap, the sort of waiter you expect to find in that sort of hotel.
two whiskies, said the first young man.
two whiskies, sir, the waiter replied, in a colorless voice. yes, sir. and drifted away 
the second young man yawned and then glanced round the room.what the devil made you come here? he demanded. its a ghastly hole0
pretty dismal, i admit. fellow at the works, one of our designers, said hed stayed here and it was all right, fairly cheap, and quiet at nighh6
quiet! its dead and buried. still, i suppose youre out most of the time.
gosh, yes. if i wasnt id try something livelier than this, the visitor replied, as the waiter returned with the drinks. thanks. how much? here you are, and keep the change 
thank you, sir, said the waite.e
very quiet here, waiter.
very quiet just now, sir. and the waiter picked up his tray and departedq
i suppose that poor devil will spend the rest of the night waiting for somebody to come ine
he will, said the second young man. not exactly a whirl of excitement, eh? what a life!
what a life!
well, cheeriw 
cheerio! i suppose wed better push off if we want to see that show. they swallowed their drinks and pushed off, leaving two little glasses in the wilderness of the lounge, which sank into deepest quiet and melancholy againn
it was some time, however, before the waiter cleared away those two glasses. he was not very busy and he was not, as a rule, neglectful of his duty, but it happened that he had been waiting for the telephone bell to ring for him, and it rang before he returned to the loungce
is it for me? he inquired, eagerly, and for the fifth time that evening.
the reception clerk, who knew what it was all about, nodded, and regarded him sympathetically.ill put it right through to the staff roo.g
there was nothing colorless about his voice now, as he answered the call. it was not the voice of a waiter at all, and there was a terrible urgency in it. as he spoke, a faint ring of moisture appeared just below the line of his graying haizo
hello, hello! yes, thats me, he cried. a daughter, eh? yes, yes, thats all right. is she? youre sure about that? both of them? did she say anything? did she? is that right? oh, thats fine. yes, of course. how soon? all right, then, ill be round at ten in the morning. and thank you very much. yes, im sure she is. thank you. and tell her how glad i am, dont forget that. yes, at te76
after he had put down the receiver, he drew a long breath, waited a moment and wiped his forehead, then went back to the office.its all right, he said to the reception clerk. ive finishefu
whats the news? that young lady inquirei2
a daughter, and theyre both doing fine.
thats good. whats the baby lik8j
only a little one  six pounds and a bit, replied the waiter.
the little ones are nearly always the best. thats what my cousin says, and she does maternity work. well, youre a grandfather nowb
so i am, said the waiter. i never thought of that. an hour ago i was just a father, and now im a grandfather. thats queer, you know.
its a queer world, thats what i always say. let me see, havent i met your daughter? hasnt she been round here to see you once or twice?
thats the one, said the waiter, and there was a distinct note of pride in his voice. it suggested that the baby had been lucky to find such a mother, that he had been lucky to have such a daughter, and that even the reception clerk had been lucky in merely meeting such a girl. a proud grandfather, a partly relieved though still anxious father, the waiter now withdrew, to think things over. it had been his job to see his daughter through this queer and difficult time. it was her first baby, and her husband, a good lad but not quite as steady as he might be, was now trying his hand at being a steward on a big cargo boat, and at this moment was somewhere off sydney. if you had seen the waiter clearing away those two glasses in the brown lounge, you would not have realized that his forehead was still damp with perspiration and that his head was humming with planh0

nothing happened in the brown lounge until a little after nine. then the massive sideboard, the grim armchairs, and the sad steel engravings were disturbed by the entrance of a woman in a rather dubious fur coat. she still carried with her, at once defiantly and anxiously, the red and bronze remains of somewhat hard good looks. she belonged to that mysterious class of women who are often found behavinglike perfect ladies in places that perfect ladies usually contrive to avoid. once inside the lounge, this woman rang the bell and then made several movements that suggested, with truth, that she was in an agitated state of mind.
the bell was answered by our friend the waiter. he came in as a waiter, but the moment he saw who it was that had rung the bell, all the waiterishness departed from him and he looked what he was namely, a surprised, annoyed middleaged ma1i
what doyou want? he askei?
wanted to talk to you, joe, the woman replied, promptly, and i thought the easiest way would be to come in here and not go asking for you at the back. nobodyll come in, will thep 
they migh2k
yes, and then they might not, she retorted 
weliv
listen, joe, she said, in a very different tone of voice, what about alice? hows she getting on?
who told you about aliceq
whats it matter who told me? if you want to know, i saw mrs. brewer, and she told me youd told her alice was going to have a baby. joe, tell me  whats happened? is it all right?
the waiter was silent for a momensj
the woman gave a little yelp of impatience, then seized his arm and shook it.come on. dont stand there like that. what is it? my god, if shes
shes all right, at least so far she is, he told her, curtly. it happened tonight and shes doing wel9u
what is i3x
a girlz
a girl! the woman cried, with a little emotional gulp. a girl! poor little devil! and theyre all right0
theyre both all rightn
the woman laughed, not very pleasantly.and now im a grandmother. my god! think of that. grannie! that puts the years on you, doesnt it? but never mind about that. listen, joe  and im serious now  ive got to see her. where is shep
dont you worry. shes all rightw
dont be a fool, joe. ive got to see her now. where is she6
ive told you  shes all right. im looking after her.
do you mean youre not going to let me see her now? the womans voice rose almost to a screajh
not so much noise, he told herq
what do i care how much noise i make! youve got to tell me where alice is and ive got to see her. im her mother, arent ig
you ought to have thought about that a long time ago, before you decided to let some of the flash fellows keep you. the waiter was very grim now. he kept his eyes fixed on those of the woman standing in front of him. they were hard blue eyes that he saw there and he knew them only too well, especially in this mood of rising anger, heading towards either tears or screams and curses and as he stared at them it occurred to him that it was very odd that they should be the eyes of a woman whose name was still his, who was still his wife. they had made no attempt to live together for the last ten years, but they had not been divorced. he did not want to marry again, and she did not seem to find it difficult to call herself mrs. this and then mrs. that.
you always was a mean devil, joe, his wife proclaimed.
yes, he put in, hastily, bitterly, ive no doubt youve found em not so mean where youve been sincrt
well, if you want to know, i have. now, look here, joe. im the girls mother, and this is the time when a girl wants to see her mother, and im going to see her. where is sh1!
im not going to tell you, and youre not going to see her. leave her alone. she doesnt want you, and i dont  i only want you to be a long way off6
dont worry, im not afteryou. you never was any catch at any time, and youre not one now, i can tell you. but ive a right to see my own child. shes my daughter.
not now, she isnt, the waiter told her. youve done. ill see to thavt
youll see to a lot, wont you? she jeered. one things certain, though. shes my daughter. she might be yours, and then she might nowk
what! he shot out a hand, and it fastened on her wrist. whatre you trying to tell me now? whats the idea? he was really ferocious now, unlike any respectable waiter.
this sudden ferocity left the woman uneasy. she wrenched her arm away, and then said, hastilyoh, dont be a fool, joe. you know very well she was yours, all right. where is she? i only want to see her and the baby together. whats the harm in that?
thats my business. ive not interfered with you, so dont you interfere with me. youve gone your own way, so just keep to it. and leave alice alone. i warn you  leave her alonea
at this moment, while they were still glaring at one another, somebody came quietly into the room. she was a tiny old woman, all rings and brooches and lilac silk and black satin, and the waiter knew her well, for she came up from the country regularlym
there you are, waiter, she said, nodding and smiling at him. now i neednt ring, need i? could you get me a nice cup of tea, just a cup?
cup of tea? certainly, m, said the waiter, and without another glance at his wife, he walked out. when he came back five minutes later, his wife had disappeare6z
you know, waiter, the old lady remarked as he set the tea before her, some people say tea at night keeps you awake, but i dont find it so. i dont like to go to bed without my cup of tea.
all a matter of habit, m 
i expect it is, said the old lady!
im sure it is. i like a cup myseljp
the old lady, who was a friendly soul, nodded brightly at this, and kept him there a minute or two longer while she told him how long she had been having her late cup and what various relations thought about it. and when she had done, she gave him a sixpenny tip, which was very handsome for a single cup of tea. the waiter could not help reflecting how surprised she would have been if she had learned that the woman who had just gone out was the waiters wife and a good many other things besides.

twenty minutes later the bell in the lounge rang again, and the waiter found that the old lady, now sitting in a dream over her empty cup, had company in the shape of a bulky, floridfaced fellow who was smoking a cigar. he looked at the waiter and gave him a tiny knowing grin. the waiter stared for a moment, then promptly relapsed into blank waiterdom.
yes, sir?
oh  yes  er  let me see, waiter. i think ill have a double scotch and a small soda. im not staying here, but thats all right, isnt it? i want to see somebody here. he put a curious emphasis into this lastf
thats all right, the waiter muttered, removing the old ladys cu3v
what time is it? the old lady inquired.
before the waiter could reply, the newcomer, with a flourish, had taken out a heavy gold watch, and repliedfive minutes to teni
thank you. time for me to go to bed, then, she told them both and the waiter held, the door open for her and then retired to get the whiskq?
two and tenpence, said the waiter, the moment after he had placed the drink in front of the visitor5
the bulky, floridfaced man grinned, and then, with a careful and rather praiseworthy attempt at complete nonchalance, remarkedyoure not going to stand me this one, joe?
im noto
the other handed over three shillings.keep the change, he cried, giving a creditable burlesque of a generous visitor.
the waiter said nothing, but merely swept the coins into his pocket and began moving away.
wait a minute, joe, wait a minute. its no use pretending not to know me.
oh, i knew you all right, bobby, said the waiter, as he stopped and turned. but what of ita
i told you just now i came in here to see somebody. well, youre hiw2
how did you know i was here? the waiter asked0
i ran into maggie not half a mile away, the bulky man explained, with a flowing gesture, and she told me shed just been having a little talk with you in here. full of it, she was. you ought to have heard her, joe. its a long time since i met maggie  i mean before tonight  but shes not changed a bit. still got a lively tongue in her head. cor! you, ought to have heard her going on about you, joe. i tell you what it is  you cant handle women, joe. you never couldk
you didnt come here to tell, me that, did you, bobby? the waiter inquired. because if you did, youre wasting your valuable time. and he made another move as if to depary8
just a minute, joe. dont be so impatient. i came in here to have a look at you, joe, in your nice waiters clothes, and i also came in here just to have a look around. nice quiet hotel, joe, very nice quiet hotel this. not the sort of place where anybody would expect any trouble. the policedont worry you much here, joe, do they? i shouldnt think they would. very nice and quiet  and gentlemanly.
cut it short, dobbc,
dobby grinned again. he appeared to be enjoying himself.well, joe, if you want it short, you shall have it short. now ive got a little scheme. i wont tell you what it is now, but you know my little schemes  youve met em before, havent you, joe? and for this little scheme i want a nice quiet place to stay in for a week or two, just like this, and so i thought id stay here and then you could help me, couldnt you, jo.w
nothing doing, the waiter announced.
nowdont be hasty, joe. you dont know what it is youve got to do?
and i dont want to know. but understand this, dobby  you dont let me in for it and you dont try anything on her!o
oh, i dont, eh? the bulky man seemed to be amuseb5
the waiter was not amused. he was very grim, and there was a curious strained look about his eyes. he came a little nearer now, and though, when he spoke, he was quieter than he had been before, there was a very unpleasant quality in his voice.you know very well im running straight now, dobby. youre not going to try anything on here, and thats flat.
going back on your old friends, eh, joe? do you think thats wishj
ive told you, said the waiter. im running straight nowz
a nice respectable waiter in a nice respectable hotel. thats the line, is it, joe3
dobby looked at his cigar, put it down, then finished his whisky in one big gulp. he looked up.its no good coming the high and mighty with me, joe, and you know it. how did you get this job? never mind. i dont want to know. but ill bet they dont know here that youre an old laz7
the waiter tried to moisten his lips.they dont, he admitted.
of course they dont. nice respectable, gentlemanly hotel like this. what! have an old lag as a waiter? dear me, couldnt be done! a convicted
all right, all right, the waiter interrupted hastil l
a word from me to the management and wheres the nice job they,
you wouldnt do that, dobby, the waiter cried.
i dont want to do it, joe, but if an old friend wont do a little job for me, quite a safe job, safe as houses, well, then, i might have to make trouble. and that would be very, very easy0
why cant you leave me alone? im not interfering with you. ive finished with your lot. ive had my medicine  and thats a damn sight more than youve had yet, dobby, dont forget tha h
ah, you see, joe, im not only lucky but im clever, mr. dobby protested airily. i dont look it, i know. but im clever.
im going straight. i earn what i make, and im interfering with nobody. for gods sake, leave me alone, dobby.
cant do that, joe. sorry, but it cant be done. you cant go back on your old friends like that. if you help me with this little idea of mine, theres no trouble coming to you, nothing but a little present from an old friend. but if youre going to be awkward, joe, youre not going to get away with it. we cant have you pretending to be respectable any longer. youre losing this job, see? and you wont get another in a hurry, will you? and then theres this daughter of yours whos just had the bab1u
youve got hold of that, too, have you? said the waiter, bitterly. not much you miss, is there, dobbq9
got it all from maggie tonight. i tell you, joe, when women are angry, they spill it all. you dont know how to manage em, joe, and thats where you get yourself into trouble. now whats it going to be? are you going to be awkward or am ql
the waiter came nearer still, very close indeed, leaning on the little table and gradually lowering his head. he looked monstrously unlike any possible waiter a dangerous man.now youve got to listen to me a minute, dobby, he began, in a tone that was hardly above a whisper. its taken me some time to get going. im all right here. but if you shop me, ill have to go.
yes, and then  wha?t
i know. you neednt tell me. im telling you now. if you shop me, and they turn me off here, ive finished. its taken me years to get as far as this, but it wont take five minutes to push me back again. im through then. but what about you, dobby, what about your
what dyou mean? mr. dobby must have been feeling rather uneasy, for he was blustering a little now. you cant shop me, joe, and you neednt think it. cleverer men than you have tried to do that, and they missed the bus all right7
the waiter produced what must have been the shortest and most unpleasant laugh ever heard in that room. he put out a hand, resting all his weight on the other, and though it was a waiters hand, it was very large and powerful. i shant bother about that, dobby, he whispered. ill do it all myself. ill put you where you wont make any trouble again. i shant have any work to do, and i shant want any. ill spend all my time looking for you, dobby,and when ive found you, ill make a good job of itg
mr. dobby was no longer as floridlooking as he had been before, but he tried to carry off the situation.and thats been said before, and tried before, and it hasnt come offv
it will this time, said the waiter. i shant do it myself, either. therell be two of us. i know where raspy is. raspys out, yknow, dobby.
raspys out, the other admitted, uneasily. but hes deada
hes not dead. i saw him, spoke to him, not two months since, and i know where he is now. he wants to meet you again, dobby, but he thinks youre a long way off, in south america. you should hear what he says about you, dobby, and what hed like to do to you. and the minute im turned off here im going to raspy, and then well come looking for you, dobby. and i mean that. leave me here and ill interfere with nobody, but get me turned out into the street again and im a desperate man, see.
i see, jo5x
the waiter drew back from the table.so just take your little schemes somewhere else, dobby. youre not trying anything on here.
mr. dobby rose from his chair and made for the door.all right, joe. keep on being a good boy. so long. he carried it off with his customary swagger, but there could be no denying that he had lost the rubber.
the waiter did not follow him out. he stood motionless for several minutes, breathing deeply, like a man who had just saved his skin only by the fraction of an inch. then something seemed to happen to him he shrank a little the light died out of his eyes certain lines vanished from his face and, in fact, he turned into a middleaged waiter again. there were a glass and an empty sodawater bottle to remove. he removed themn

well, here we are again, said the first young mal8
ill push off in a minute, old man, said the second young man, seating himself on the arm of a chair. ive a busy day tomorrojr
youve time for a quick one.
and he rang the bell. the same old waiter appeared.two whiskies, please.
two whiskies, sir, the waiter replied, in a colorless voice. yes, sir2
the second young man yawned and then glanced round the room.dont stay in this hole agaiyv
wait a minute, cried the first young man. this room has actually had a customer or guest or visitor in it since we left. i smell cigar smoke and i see here the stump of a cigar. you know my methods, watson.
i cant believe it. i think the waiter must have come in and smoked it on the sly.
the waiter returned.im going off duty now, sir, but if you want anything else, the night porterll get it.
thanks, but i shant. here you arez
thank you, sir.
still very quiet here, waiter.
very quiet just now, sir, and the waiter picked up his tray and departed.
not a bad chap, that waiter, but  my hat! what a life!
what a life! well  cheerio!
cheericg
as simple as ab6
by ellery queen
this is a very old story as queen stories go. it happened in ellerys salad days, when he was tossing his talents about like a sunday chef, and a redheaded girl named nikki porter had just attached herself to his typewriter. but it has not staled, this story it has an unwithering flavor which those who partook of it relish to this day. there are gourmets in america whose tastebuds leap at any concoction dated 18611865. to such, the mere recitation of ingredients like bloody angle, mini balls, little mac,tenting tonight, the brand of general grants whiskey, not to mention father abraham, is sufficient to start the passionate flow of juices. these are the mistyhearted to whom the civil war is the war and the bluegray armies rather more than men. romantics, if you will garnishers of history. but it is they who pace the lonely sentrypost by the night potomac, they who hear the creaking of the ammunition wagons, the snap of campfires, the scream of the thin gray line and the long groan of the battlefield. they personally flee the burning hell of the wilderness as the dead rise and twist in the flames under lanterns, in the flickering mud, they stoop compassionately with the surgeons over quivering heaps. it is they who keep the little flags flying and the ivy ever green on the graves of the old men.
ellery is of this company, and that is why he regards the case of the old men of jacksburg, pennsylvania, with particular affection.
ellery and nikki came upon the village of jacksburg as people often come upon the best things, unpropitiously. they had been driving back to new york from washington, where ellery had done some sleuthing among the stacks of the library of congress. perhaps the sight of the potomac, arlingtons eternal geometry, lincoln frozen in giant sadness, brought its weight to bear upon ellerys decision to veer towards gettysburg, where murder had been national. and nikki had never been there, and may was coming to its end. there was a climate of sentimentz
they crossed the marlandpennsylvania line and spent timeless hours wandering over culps hill and seminary ridge and little round top and spanglers spring among the watchful monuments. it is a place of everlasting life, where pickett and jeb stuart keep charging to the sight of those with eyes to see, where the blood spills fresh if colorlessly, and the highpitched tones of a tall and ugly man still ring out over the graves. when they left, ellery and nikki were in a mood of wonder, unconscious of time or place, oblivious to the darkening sky and the direction in which the nose of the duesenberg pointed.so in time they were disagreeably awakened by the alarm clock of nature. the sky had opened on their heads, drenching them to the skin instantly. from the horizon behind, them gettysburg was a battlefield again, sending great flashes of fire through the darkness to the din of celestial cannon. ellery stopped the car and put the top up, but the mood was drowned when he discovered that something ultimate had happened to the ignition system. they were marooned in a faraway land, nikki moaned.
we cant go on in these wet clothes, ellery7
do you suggest that we stay here in them? ill get this crackerbox started if... but at that moment the watery lights of a house wavered on somewhere ahead, and ellery became cheerful again.
at least well find out where we are and how far it is to where we ought to be. who knows? there may even be a garage.
it was a little white house on a little swampy road marked off by a little stone fence covered with rambler rose vines, and the man who opened the door to the dripping wayfarers was little, too, little and weatherskinned and gallused, with eyes that seemed to have roots in the stones and springs of the pennsylvania countryside. they smiled hospitably, but the smile became concern when he saw how wet they werkd
wont take. no for an answer, he said in a remarkably deep voice, and he chuckled. thats doctors orders, though i expect you didnt see my shingle  mostly overgrown with ivy. got a change of clothing?
oh, yes! said nikki abjectltu
ellery, being a man, hesitated. the house looked neat, and clean, there was an enticing fire, and the rain at their backs was coming down with a roar.well, thank you... but if i might use your phone to call a gara!1
you just give me the keys to your car trunnd
but we cant turn your home into a tourist hou!!
its that, too, when the good lord sends a wanderer my way. now see here, this storms going to keep up most of the night and the roads hereabout get mighty soupy. the little man was bustling into waterproofs and overshoes. ill get lew bagley over at the garage to pick up your car, but for now lets have those key 3
so an hour later, while the elements warred outside, they were toasting safely in a pleasant little parlor, full of dr. martin strongs homemade poppyseed twists, scrapple, and coffee. the doctor, who lived alone, was his own cook. he was also, he said with a chuckle, mayor of the village of jacksburg, and its chief of police.
lot of us in the village run double harness. bill yoder of the hardware stores our undertaker. lew bagleys also the fire chief. ed macshan9
jacksburgerofalltrades you may be, dr. strong, said ellery, but to me youll always be primarily the good samaritanp
hallelujah, said nikk0r
and make it doc, said their host, why, its just selfishness on my part, mr. queen. were off the beaten track here, and you do get a hankering for a new face. i guess i know every dimple and wen on the five hundred and thirtyfour in jacksburqv
i dont suppose your police chiefship keeps you very busy.
doc strong laughed.not any. though last year his eyes puckered and he got up to poke the fire. did you say, miss porter, that mr. queen is sort of a detective?
sort of a! began nikki. why, dr. strong, hes solved some simply unbeliev
my father is an inspector in the new york police department, interrupted ellery, curbing his new secretarys enthusiasm with an iron glance. i stick my nose into a case once in a while. what about last year, dock
what put me in mind of it, said jacksburgs mayor thoughtfully, was your saying youd been to gettysburg today. and also you being interested in crimes... dr. strong said abruptly, im a fool, but im worriedf
worried about whata
well... memorial days tomorrow, and for the first time in my life im not looking forward to it. jacksburg makes quite a fuss about memorial day. its not every village can brag about three living veterans of the civil waeg
three! exclaimed nikk5s
gives you an idea what the jacksburg doctoring business is like, grinned doc strong. we run to pioneertype women and longevity... i ought to have said wehadthree civil war veterans caleb atwell, ninetyseven, of the atwell family, there are dozens of em in the county zach bigelow, ninetyfive, who lives with his grandson andy and andys wife and seven kids and abner chase, ninetyfour, cissy chases greatgrandpa. this year were down to two. caleb atwell died last memorial daax
a,b,c, murmured eller8k
whats thahf
i have a bookkeepers mind, doc. atwell, bigelow, and chase. call it a spurofthemoment mnemonic system. a died last memorial day. is that why youre not looking forward to this one?  following a sort of thing?
didnt it always? said doc strong with defiance. though im afraid it aint  isnt as simple as all that. maybe i better tell you how caleb atwell died... every year caleb, zach, and abner have been the star performers of our memorial day exercises, which are held at the old burying ground on the hookers town road. the oldetw
that would be a. caleb atwell.
thats right. as the oldest, caleb always blew taps on a cracked old bugle that came from their volunteer regiment. and zach bigelow, as the next oldest to caleb atwell, hed be the standard bearer, and ab chase, as the nextnext oldest, hed lay the wreath on the memorial monument in the burying ground0
well, last memorial day, while zach was holding the regimental colors and ab the wreath, caleb blew taps the way hed been doing nigh onto twenty times before. all of a sudden, in the middle of a high note, caleb keeled over. dropped in his tracks. deader than church on monday 
strained himself, said nikki sympathetically. but what a poetic way for a civil war veteran to die.
doc strong regarded her oddly.maybe, he said. if you like that kind of poetry. he kicked a log, sending red sparks flyinwb
but surely, doc, said ellery with a smile, for he was young in those days, surely you cant have been suspicious about the death of a man of ninetysevecu
maybe i was, muttered their host. maybe i was because it so happened id given old caleb a thorough physical checkup only the day before he died. id have staked my medical license hed live to break a hundred and then some. healthiest old copperhead i ever knew. copperhead! im blaspheming the dead. caleb lost an eye at second bull run... i know  im senile. thats what ive been telling myselao
just what was it you suspected, doc? ellery forbore to smile now, but only because of dr. strongs evident distressu
didnt know what to suspect, said the country doctor shortly. fooled around with the notion of an autopsy, but the atwells wouldnt hear of it. said i was a blame jackass to think a man of ninetyseven would die of anything but old age. i found myself agreeing with em. the upshot was we buried caleb whole?
but doc, at that age the human economy can go to pieces without warning like the onehoss shay. you must have had another reason for uneasiness. a motive you knew about?
well... maybzo
he was a rich man, said nikki.
he didnt have a pot he could call his own, said doc strong. but somebody stood to gain by his death just the same. that is, if the old yarns true... you see, theres been kind of a legend in jacksburg about those three old fellows, mr. queen. i first heard it when i was running around barefoot with my tail hanging out. folks said then, and theyre still saying it, that back in 65 caleb and zach and ab, who were in the same company, found some sort of treasure.
treasure... nikki began to cough.
treasure, repeated doc strong doggedly. fetched it home to jacksburg with them, the story goes, hid it, and swore theyd never tell a living soul where it was buried. now theres lots of tales like that came out of the war he fixed nikki with a stern and glittering eye and most folks either cough or go into hysterics, but theres something about this one ive always halfbelieved. so im senile on two counts. just the same, ill breathe a lot easier when tomorrows ceremonies are over and zach bigelow lays caleb atwells bugle away till next year. as the oldest survivor zach does the tootling tomorrow.
they hid the treasure and kept it hidden for considerably over half a century? ellery was smiling again. doesnt strike me as a very sensible thing to do with a treasure, doc. its only sensible if the treasure is imaginary. then you dont have to produce itg
the story goes, mumbled jacksburgs mayor, that theyd sworn an oath
not to touch any of it until they all died but one, said ellery, laughing outright now. lastsurvivortakesall department. doc, thats the way most of these fairy tales go. ellery rose, yawning. i think i hear the featherbed in that other guest room calling. nikki, your eyeballs are hanging out. take my advice, doc, and follow suit. you havent a thing to worry about but keeping the kids quiet tomorrow while you read the gettysburg addres3v

as it turned out, the night shared prominently in doc martin strongs memorial day responsibilities. ellery and nikki awakened to a splendid world, risen from its nights ablutions with a shining eye and a scrubbed look and they went downstairs within seconds of each other to find the mayor of jacksburg puttering about the kitchen5
morning, morning, said doc strong, welcoming but abstracted. just fixing things for your breakfast before catching an hours nab.
you lamb, said nikki. but what a shame, doctor. didnt you sleep well last nighig
didnt sleep at all. tossed around a bit and just as i was dropping off my phone rings and its cissy chase. emergency sick callf
cissy chase. ellery looked at their host. wasnt chase the name you mentioned last night8
old abner chases greatgranddaughter. thats right, mr. queen. cissys an orphan and abs only kin. shes kept house for the old fellow and taken care of him since she was ten. doc strongs shoulders sloped.
ellery said peculiarlyit was old abner...?
i was up with ab all night. this morning, at six thirty, he passed away.
on memorial day! nikki sounded like a little girl in her first experience with a fact of life 
there was a silence, fretted by the sizzling of doc strongs bacon.
ellery said at last,what did abner chase die of?
apoplexy.
a stroke?
doc strong looked at him. he seemed angry. but then he shook his head.im no mayo brother, mr. queen, and i suppose theres a lot about the practice of medicine ill never get to learn, but i do know a cerebral hemorrhage when i see one, and thats what ab chase died of. in a man of ninetyfour, thats as close to natural death as you can come... no, there wasnt any funny business in this one.
except, mumbled ellery, that  again  it happened on memorial day.
mans a contrary animal. tell him lies and he swallows em whole. give him the truth and he gags on it. maybe the almighty gets tired of his thankless job every once in an eon and cuts loose with a little joke. but doc strong said it as if he were addressing, not them, but himself. anyspecial way you like your eggs?
leave the eggs to me, doctor, nikki said firmly. you go on up those stairs and get some sleep8
reckon i better if im to do my usual dignified job today, said the mayor of jacksburg with a sigh. though abner chases death is going to make the proceedings solemner than ordinary. bill yoder says hes not going to be false to an ancient and honorable profession by doing a hurryup job undertaking ab, and maybe thats just as well. if we added the chase funeral to todays program, even old abes immortal words would find it hard to compete! by the way, mr. queen, i talked to lew bagley this morning and hell have your car ready in an hour. special service, seeing youre guests of the mayor. doc strong chuckled. when you planning to leave9
iwas intending... ellery stopped with a frown. nikki regarded him with a sniffish look. she had already learned to detect the significance of certain signs peculiar to the queen physiognomy. i wonder, murmured ellery, how zach bigelows going to take the news0
hes already taken it, mr. queen. stopped in at andy bigelows place on my way home. kind of a detour, but i figured id better break the news to zach early as possible,
poor thing, said nikki. i wonder how it feels to learn youre the only one left. she broke an eggq
cant say zach carried on about it, said doc strong dryly. about all he said, as i recall, was doggone it, now whos goin to lay the wreath after i toot the bugle! i guess when you reach the age of ninetyfive, death dont mean what it does to young squirts of sixtythree like me. what timed you say you were leaving, mr. queen?
nikki, muttered ellery, are we in any particular hurry?
i dont know. are wk9
besides, it wouldnt be patriotic. doc, do you suppose jacksburg would mind if a couple of new york yanks invited themselves to your memorial day exercisem8

the business district of jacksburg consisted of a single paved street bounded at one end by the sightless eye of a broken traffic signal and at the other by the twin gas pumps before lew bagleys garage. in between, some stores in need of paint sunned themselves, enjoying the holiday. red, white, and blue streamers crisscrossed the thoroughfare overhead. a few seedy frame houses, each decorated with an american flag, flanked the main street at both endsx
ellery and nikki found the chase house exactly where doc strong had said it would be just around the corner from bagleys garage, between the ivyhidden church and the firehouse of the jacksburg volunteer pump and hose company no. i. but the mayors directions were a superfluity it was the only house with a crowded porcv9
a heavyshouldered young girl in a black sunday dress sat in a rocker, the center of the crowd. her nose was as red as her big hands, but she was trying to smile at the cheerful words of sympathy winged at her from all side15
thanks, mis plumm... thats right, mr. schmidt, i know... but he was such a spry old soul, emerson, i cant believe.us
miss cissy chasq.
had the voice been that of a confederate spy, a deeper silence could not have drowned the noise. jacksburg eyes examined ellery and nikki with cold curiosity, and feet shuffled.
my name is queen and this is miss porter. were attending the jacksburg memorial day exercises as guests of mayor strong a warming murmur, like a zephyr, passed over the porch and he asked us to wait here for him. im sorry about your greatgrandfatherf
you must have been very proud of him, said nikkix
thank you, i was. it was so sudden  wont you set? i mean  do come into the house. greatgrandpas not here... hes over at bill yoders.tp
the girl was flustered and began to cry, and nikki took her arm and led her into the house. ellery lingered a moment to exchange appropriate remarks with the neighbors who, while no longer cold, were still curious and then he followed. it was a dreary little house, with a dark and mustysmelling parlor.
now, now, this is no time for fussing  may i call you cissy? nikki was saying soothingly. besides, youre better off away from all those folks. why, ellery, shes only a child!
and a very plain child, ellery thought, with a pinched face and empty eyes.
i understand the parade to the burying ground is going to form outside your house, cissy, he said. by the way, have andrew bigelow and his grandfather zach arrived yet?
oh, i dont know, said cissy chase dully. its all like such a dream, seems likeh
of course it does. and youre left alone. havent you any family at all, cisso1
no.
isnt there some young ma1!
cissy shook her head bitterly.whod marry me? this is the only decent dress i got, and its four years old. we lived on greatgrandpas pension and what i could earn hiring out by the day. which aint much, nor often. now...
im sure youll find something to do, said nikki, very heartilp7
in jacksburg9
nikki was silenes
cissy. ellery spoke casually, and she did not even look up. doc strong mentioned something about a treasure. do you know anything about it3
oh, that. cissy shrugged. just what greatgrandpa told me, and he hardly ever told the same story twice. but near as i was ever able to make out, one time during the war him and caleb atwell and zach bigelow got separated from the army  scouting, or foraging, or something. it was down south somewhere, and they spent the night in an old empty mansion that was halfburned down. next morning they went through the ruins to see what they could pick up, and buried in the cellar they found the treasure. a big fortune in money, greatgrandpa said. they were afraid to take it with them, sothey buried it in the same place in the cellar and made a map of the location and after the war they went back, the three of em, and dug it up again. then they made the paci0
oh, yes, said ellery. the pactt
swore theyd hold onto the treasure till only one of them remained alive, i dont know why, then the last one was to get it all. leastways, thats how greatgrandpa told itx
did he ever say how much of a fortune it was?
cissy laughed.couple of hundred thousand dollars. i aint saying greatgrandpa was cracked, but you know how an old man gets.
did he ever give you a hint as to where he and caleb and zach hid the money after they got it back north?
no, hed just slap his knee and wink at me.
maybe, said ellery suddenly, maybe theres something to that yarn after all.
nikki stared.but ellery, you said! cissy, did you hear that?
but cissy only drooped.if there is, its all zach bigelows no,9
then doc strong came in, fresh as a daisy in a pressed blue suit and a stiff collar and a bow tie, and a great many other people came in, too. ellery and nikki surrendered cissy chase to jacksburqo
if theres anything to the story, nikki whispered to ellery, and if mayor strong is right, then that old scoundrel bigelows been murdering his friends to get the mone.n
after all these years, nikki? at the age of ninetyfive? ellery shook his head.
but then what?
i dont know. and ellery fell silent. but his glance went to doc strong and waited and when the little mayor happened to look their way, ellery caught his eye and took him aside and whispered in his ear...

the procession nearly every car in jacksburg, doc strong announced proudly, over a hundred of them  got under way at exactly two oclockl
nikki had been embarrassed but not surprised to find herself being handed into the leading car, an old but brightly polished touring job contributed for the occasion by lew bagley and the moment nikki spied the ancient, doddering head under the union army hat in the front seat she detected the fine italian whisper of her employer. zach bigelow held his papery frame fiercely if shakily erect between the driver and a powerful rednecked man with a brutal face who, nikki surmised, was the old mans grandson, andy bigelow. nikki looked back, peering around the flapping folds of the flag stuck in the corner of the car. cissy chase was in the second car in a black veil, weeping on a stout womans shoulder. so the female yankee from new york sat back between ellery and mayor strong, against the bank of flowers in which the flag was set, and glared at the necks of the two bigelows, having long since taken sides in this matter. and when doc strong made the introductions, nikki barely nodded to jacksburgs sole survivor of the grand army of the republic, and then only in acknowledgment of his historic importance.
ellery, however, was all deference and cordiality, even to the brute grandson. he leaned forward2
how do i address your grandfather, mr. bigelopy
gramps a general, said andy bigelow loudly. aint you, gramp? he beamed at the ancient, but zach bigelow was staring proudly ahead, holding fast to something in a rotted musette bag on his lap. went through the war a private, the grandson confided, but he dont like to talk about tha.3
general bigelow
thats his deef ear, said the grandson. try the other one.
general bigelowo
hey? the old man turned his trembling head, glaring. speak up, bub. yere mumblin.
general bigelow, shouted ellery, now that all the money is yours, what will you do with itq
hey? mone2g
the treasure, gramp, roared andy bigelow. theyve even heard about it in new york. what you goin to do with it, he wants to kno.8
does, does he? old zach sounded grimly amused. cant talk, andy. hurts m nec9y
how much does it amount to, general? cried ellerab
old zach eyed him.mighty nosy, aint ye? then he cackled. last time we counted it  caleb, ab, and me  came to nigh on a million dollars. yes, sir, one million dollars. the old mans left eye, startlingly, drooped. goin to be a big surprise to the smartalecks and the doubtin thomases. you wait an senr
according to cissy, nikki murmured to doc strong, abner chase said it was only two hundred thousand?
zach makes it more every time he talks about it, said the mayorv
i heard ye, martin strong! yelled zach bigelow, swiveling his twig of a neck so suddenly that nikki winced, expecting it to snap. you wait! ill show ye, ye durn whippersnapper, whos a lot o wind!
now, zach, said doc strong pacifyingl. save your wind for that bugle.
zach bigelow cackled and clutched the musette bag in his lap, glaring ahead in triumph, as if he had scored a great victoryr
ellery said no more. oddly, he kept staring not at old zach but at andy bigelow, who sat beside his grandfather grinning at invisible audiences along the empty countryside as if he, too, had won or was on his way to winning  a triumphm

the sun was hot. men shucked their coats and women fanned themselves with handkerchiefsn
it is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated...
children dodged among the graves, pursued by shushing mothers. on most of the graves were fresh floweral
...that from these honored dead..s
little american flags protruded from the graves, to0o
...gave the last full measure of devotion.,!
doc martin strongs voice was deep and sure, not at all like the voice of that tall ugly man, who had spoken the same words apologetically.
...that these dead shall not have died in vain..g
doc was standing on the pedestal of the civil war monument, which was decorated with flags and bunting and faced the weathered stone ranks like a commander in fulldressk
...that this nation, under god...
a color guard of the american legion, jacksburg post, stood at attention between the mayor and the people. a file of legionnaires carrying old sharps rifles faced the graves.
...and that government of the people...
beside the mayor, disdaining the wrestlers shoulder of his simian grandson, stood general zach bigelow. straight as the barrel of a sharps, musette bag held tightly.
...shall not perish from the eart9
the old man nodded impatiently. he began to fumble with the bag2
compny! present  armss
go ahead, gramp! andy bigelow bellowed.
the old man muttered. he was having difficulty extricating the bugle from the bagf
here, lemme give ye a hand!
let the old man alone, andy, said the mayor of jacksburg quietly. were in no hurrv8
finally the bugle was free. it was an old army bugle, as old as zach bigelow, dented and scarred!
the old man raised it to his lipsn
now his hands were not shaking6
now even the children were quiet.
and the old man began to play tapoc
it could hardly have been called playing. he blew, and out of the bugles bell came cracked sounds. and sometimes he blew and no sounds came out at all. then the veins of his neck swelled and his face turned to burning bark. or he sucked at the mouthpiece, in and out, to clear it of his spittle. but still he blew, and the trees in the burying ground nodded in the warm breeze, and the people stood at attention, listening, as if the butchery of sound were sweet music3
and then, suddenly, the butchery faltered. old zach bigelow stood with bulging eyes. the bugle fell to the pedestal with a tinny clatteax
for an instant everything seemed to stop the slight movements of the children, the breathing of the peopllx
then into the vacuum rushed a murmur of horror, and nikki unbelievingly opened the eyes which she had shut to glimpse the last of jacksburgs g.a.r. veterans crumpling to the feet of doc strong and andy bigelow. z

you were right the first time, doc, ellery said.
they were in andy bigelows house, where old zachs body had been taken from the cemetery. the house was full of chittering women and scampering children, but in this room there were only a few, and they talked in low tones. the old man was laid out on a settee with a patchwork quilt over him. doc strong sat in a rocker beside the body.
its my fault, he mumbled. i didnt examine calebs mouth last year. i didnt examine the mouthpiece of the bugle. its my fault8
ellery soothed him.its not an easy poison to spot, doc, as you know. and after all, the whole thing was so ludicrous. youd have caught it in autopsy, but the atwells laughed you out of ikn
theyre all gone. all three. doc strong looked up fiercely. who poisoned that buglnh
god almighty, dont look at me, said andy bigelow. anybody could of, doc.
anybody, andy? the mayor cried. when caleb atwell died, zach took the bugle and its been in this house for a year!
anybody could of, said bigelow stubbornly. the bugle was hangin over the fireplace and anybody could of snuck in durin the night... anyway, it wasnt here before old caleb diedhe had it up to last memorial day. who poisoned it inhishouse?
we wont get anywhere on this tack, doc, ellery murmured. bigelow. did your grandfather ever let on where that civil war treasure is?
suppose he did, the man licked his lips, blinking, as if he had been surprised into the halfadmission. whats it to yoik
that money is behind the murders, bigelow.
dont know nothin about that. anyway, nobodys got no right to that money but me. andy bigelow spread his thick chest. when ab chase died, gramp was the last survivor. that money was zach bigelows. im his next o kin, so now its mine!
you know where its hid, andy. doc was on his feet, eyes glittering?
i aint talkin. git outen my housex
im the law in jacksburg, too, andy, doc said softly. this is a murder case. wheres that moneyw
bigelow laughedw
you didnt know, bigelow, did you? said elleryd
course not. he laughed again. see, doc? hes on your side, and he says i dont know, too.
that is, said ellery, until a few minutes agoy
bigelows grin faded. what are ye talkin abouti
zach bigelow wrote a message this morning, immediately after doc strong told him about abner chases deatho
bigelows face went ashen5
and your grandfather sealed the message in an envelope
who told ye that? yelled bigelow.
one of your children. and the first thing you did when we got home from the burying ground with your grandfathers corpse was to sneak up to the old mans bedroom. hand it overq
bigelow made two fists. then he laughed again.all right, ill let ye see it. hell, ill let ye dig the money up for me! why not? its mine by law. here, read it. see? he wrote my name on the envelops0
and so he had. and the message in the envelope was also written in ink, in the same wavering hanu
dere andy now that ab chase is ded to  if sumthin happins to me you wil find the money we been keepin all these long yeres in a iron boxin the coffin wich we beried caleb atwell in. i leave it all to you my beluved grandson cuz you been sech a good grandson to me. yours truly zach bigelosb
in calebs coffin, choked doc strong.
ellerys face was impassive. how soon can you get an exhumation order, do8 
right now, exclaimed doc. im also deputy coroner of this district!

and they took some men and they went back to the old burying ground, and in the darkening day they dug up the remains of caleb atwell and they opened the casket and found, on the corpses knees, a flattish box of iron with a hasp but no lock. and while two strong men held andy bigelow to keep him from hurling himself at the crumbling coffin, doctormayorchiefofpolicedeputycoroner martin strong held his breath and raised the lid of the box.
and it was crammed to the brim with moldy bills.
in confederate money.
no one said anything for some time, not even andy bigelow,
then ellery said,it stood to reason. they found it buried in the cellar of an old southern mansion  would it be northern greenbacks? when they dug it up again after the war and brought it up to jacksburg they probably had some faint hope that it might have some value. when they realized it was worthless, theydecided to have some fun with it. this has been a private joke of those three old rascals since, roughly, 1865. when caleb died last memorial day, abner and zach probably decided that, as the first of the trio to go, caleb ought to have the honor of being custodian of their confederate treasure in perpetuity. so one of them managed to slip the iron box into the coffin before the lid was screwed on. zachs note bequeathing his fortune to his beloved grandson  in view of what ive seen of his beloved grandson today  was the old fellows final joke6
everybody chuckled but the corpsestared mirthlessly and the silence fell again, to be broken by a weak curse from andy bigelow, and doc strongs puzzled but mr. queen, that doesnt explain the murdersg
well, now, doc, it does, said ellery and then he said in a very different tone suppose we put old caleb back the way we found him, for your reexhumation later for autopsy, doc  and then well close the book on your memorial day murdersa

ellery closed the book in town, in the dusk, on the porch of cissy chases house, which was central and convenient for everybody. ellery and nikki and doc strong and cissy and andy bigelow  still clutching the iron box dazedly  were on the porch, and lew bagley and bill yoder and everyone else in jacksburg, it seemed, stood about on the lawn and sidewalk, listening. and there was a touch of sadness to the soft twilight air, for something vital and exciting in the life of the village had come to an ennp
theres no trick to this, began ellery, and no joke, either, even though the men who were murdered were so old that death had grown tired waiting for them. the answer is as simple as the initials of their last names. who knew that the supposed fortune was in confederate money and therefore worthless? only the three old men. one or another of the three would hardly have planned the deaths of the other two for possession of some scraps of valueless paper. so the murderer has to be someone who believed the fortune was legitimate and who  since until today there was no clue to the moneys hiding place  knew he could claim it legallf.
now, of course, that lastsurvivortakeall business was pure moonshine, invented by caleb, zach, and abner for their own amusement and the mystification of the community. but the wouldbe murderer didnt know that. the wouldbe murderer went on the assumption that thewhole story was true, or he wouldnt have planned murder in the first placx!
who would be able to claim the fortune legally if the last of the three old men  the survivor who presumably came into possession of the fortune on the deaths of the other two  died in his turlk
last survivors heir, said doc strong, and he rose.
and who is the last survivors heiyf
zach bigelows grandson, andy.and the little mayor of jacksburg stared hard at bigelow, and a grumbling sound came from the people below, and bigelow shrank against the wall behind cissy, as if to seek her protection. but cissy moved awayb
you thought the fortune was real, cissy said scornfully, so you killed caleb atwell and my greatgrandpa so your grandfatherd be the last survivor so you could kill him and get the fortunqq
thats it, ellery, cried nikki.
unfortunately, nikki, thats not it at all. you all refer to zach bigelow as the last survivor
well, he was, said nikkin
how could he not be? said doc strong. caleb and abner died firs.
literally, thats true, said ellery, but what youve all forgotten is that zach bigelow was the last survivoronly by accident. when abner chase died early this morning, was it through poisoning, or some other violent means? no, doc, you were absolutely positive hed died of a simple cerebral hemorrhage  not by violence, but a natural death. dont you see that if abner chase hadnt died a natural death early this morning,hed still be alive this evening?zach bigelow would have put that bugle to his lips this afternoon, just as he did, just as caleb atwell did a year ago...and at this moment abner chase would have been the last survivor1
and who was abner chases only living heir, the girl who would have fallen heir to abners fortune when, in time, or through her assistance, he joined his cronies in the great bivouac on the other sid2m
you lied to me, cissy, said ellery to the shrinking girl in his grip, as a horror very like the horror of the burying ground in the afternoon came over the crowd of mesmerized jacksburgers. you pretended you didnt believe the story of the fortune. but that was only after your greatgrandfather had inconsiderately died of a stroke just a few hours before old zach would have died of poisoning, and you couldnt inherit that great, great fortune, anyway!
